
FROM THIRD 
WORLD 
TO Fl HST 
FROM THIRD 
WORLD 
TO FIRST 
THE SINGAPORE STORY: 
1965-2000 
Lee Kuan Yew 
SINGAPORE AND THE 
ASIAN ECONOMIC BOOM 
-HarperCollinsPublishers 
FROM THIRD WORLD TO FIRST Copyright © 2000 by Lee Kuan Yew. 
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this 
book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written 
permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles 
and reviews. For information address HarperCollins Publishers Inc., 
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022. 
HarperCollins books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales 
promotional use. For information please write: Special Markers Department, 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc., 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022. 
FIRST EDITION 
Designed by North Marker Street Graphics 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Dara is available. 
ISBN 0-06-019776-5 
00 QW 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
To Goh Keng Swee, S. Rajaratnam, Hon Sui Sen, 
Lim Kim San, Eddie Barker, Toh Chin Chye, 
Ong Pang Boon, and Othman Wok, 
my old-guard colleagues who together made possible 
The Singapore Story. 
Contents 
Foreword by Dr. Henry A. Kissinger lX 
Preface Xlll 
Acknowledgments XVll 
Part I Getting the Basics Right 1 
1 Going It Alone 3 
2 Building an Army from Scratch 11 
3 Britain Pulls Out 31 
4 Surviving Without a Hinterland 49 
5 Creating a Financial Center 71 
6 Winning Over the Unions 83 
7 A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 95 
8 The Communists Self-Destruct 109 
9 Straddling the Middle Ground 121 
10 Nurturing and Attracting Talent 135 
11 Many Tongues, One Language 145 
12 Keeping the Government Clean 157 
13 Greening Singapore 173 
14 Managing the Media 185 
15 Conductor of an Orchestra 199 
Vlll Contents 
Part II In Search of Space-Regional and International 225 
16 Ups and Downs with Malaysia 227 
17 Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 259 
18 Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 293 
19 Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia: Coming to Terms 
with the Modern World 309 
20 Asean-Unpromising Start, Promising Future 329 
21 East Asia in Crisis 1997-1999 343 
22 Inside the Commonwealth Club 351 
23 New Bonds with Britain 373 
24 Ties with Australia and New Zealand 385 
25 South Asia's Legends and Leaders 403 
26 Following Britain into Europe 423 
27 The Soviet Union-An Empire Implodes 439 
28 America: The Anticommunist Anchorman 449 
29 Strategic Accord with the United States 471 
30 America's New Agenda 487 
31 Japan: Asia's First Miracle 501 
32 Lessons from Japan 521 
3 3 Korea: At the Crossroads 5 31 
34 Hong Kong's Transition 543 
35 Taiwan: The Other China 559 
36 China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 573 
37 Deng Xiaoping 's China 595 
38 China Beyond Beijing 617 
39 Tiananmen 625 
40 China: To Be Rich Is Glorious 645 
Part III Winding Up 
41 Passing the Baton 
42 My Family 
43 Epilogue 
Index 661 
663 
675 
685 
693 
Foreword 
Dr. Henry A. Kissinger 
In the second half of the twentieth century, the emergence of scores of new 
states has made international politics and economics truly global for the 
first time in history. At the same time, technology has made it possible 
for nearly every country to participate in events in every part of the world 
as they occur. 
Unfortunately , the explosion in information has not been accompa­
nied by a similar increase in knowledge. The continents interact, but they 
do not necessarily understand each other. The uniformity of technology is 
accompanied by an implicit assumption that politics, and even cultures, 
will become homogenized. Especially, the long-established nations of the 
West have fallen prey to the temptation of ignoring history and judging 
every new state by the criteria of their own civilizations. It is often over­
looked that the institutions of the West did not spring full-blown from 
the brow of contemporaries but evolved over centuries which shaped fron­
tiers and defined legitimacy , constitutional provisions, and basic values. 
But history does matter. The institutions of the West developed grad­
ually while those of most new states were put into place in elaborated 
form immediately . In the West, a civil society evolved side-by-side with 
the maturation of the modern state. This made possible the growth of 
representative institutions which confined the state's power to those mat­
ters which society could not deal with by its own arrangements. Political 
conflicts were moderated by overriding purposes. 
Many postcolonial states have no comparable history. Tasks, which, in 
X Foreword 
the West, were accomplished over centuries, must be completed in a 
decade or two and under much more complex circumstances. Where the 
common national experience is colonial rule, especially when the state 
comprises diverse ethnic groups, political opposition is often considered 
an assault on the political validity of the state rather than of a particular 
government. 
Singapore is a case in point. As the main British naval base in the Far 
East, it had neither prospect nor aspiration for nationhood until the col­
lapse of European power in the aftermath of the Second World War 
redrew the political map of Southeast Asia. In the first wave of decolo­
nization, Singapore was made part of Malaya until its largely Chinese 
population proved too daunting for a state attempting to define its 
national identity by a Malay majority. Malaya extruded Singapore because 
it was not yet ready to cope with so large a Chinese population or, less 
charitably, to teach Singapore the habits of dependence if it was forced 
back into what later became the Malaysian Federation. 
But history shows that normally prudent, ordinary calculations can be 
overturned by extraordinary personalities. In the case of Lee Kuan Yew, 
the father of Singapore's emergence as a national state, the ancient argu­
ment whether circumstance or personality shapes events is settled in favor 
of the latter. Circumstances could not have been less favorable. Located on 
a sandbar with nary a natural resource, Singapore had in the 1950s a poly­
glot population of slightly over a million (today over 3 million), of which 
75.4 percent was Chinese, 13.6 percent Malay, and 8.6 percent Indian. It 
adjoined in the south with Indonesia, with a population of over 100 mil­
lion (now nearly double that), and in the north with Malaya (later 
Malaysia), with a then-population of 6.28 million. By far the smallest 
country in Southeast Asia, Singapore seemed destined to become a client 
state of more powerful neighbors, if indeed it could preserve its indepen­
dence at all. 
Lee Kuan Yew thought otherwise. Every great achievement is a dream 
before it becomes reality, and his vision was of a state that would not sim­
ply survive but prevail by excelling. Superior intelligence, discipline, and 
ingenuity would substitute for resources. Lee Kuan Yew summoned his 
compatriots to a duty they had never previously perceived: first to clean 
up their city, then to dedicate it to overcome the initial hostility of their 
Foreword XI 
neighbors and their own ethnic divisions by superior performance. The 
Singapore of coday is his testament. Annual per capita income has grown 
from less than $1,000 at the time of independence to nearly $30,000 
today. It is the high-tech leader of Southeast Asia, the commercial 
entrepot, the scientific center. Singapore plays a major role in the politics 
and economics of Southeast Asia and beyond. 
This volume is Lee Kuan Yew's account of his extraordinary achieve­
ment. He navigated this passage by understanding not only the require­
ments of his own society but the needs and motives of his neighbors. A 
thoughtful discussion of Indonesia and the fall of its President Suharto is 
matched by Lee Kuan Yew's account of his encounters with China and its 
leaders. His narrative of Singapore's abortive venture into creating a satel­
lite city in Suzhou is particularly instructive on the challenge of melding 
the market economics of even so friendly an interlocucor as Singapore 
with the political and social realities of a China midway between Mao and 
reform. 
Lee Kuan Yew would not be true to himself were he less than frank 
about his analysis of the difference between the individualism of the West 
and the priority for social cohesion in countries such as his and in much of 
the rest of Asia. He does not ask us co change our patterns, only co refrain 
from imposing them on societies with different histories and necessities. 
These views have subjected Lee Kuan Yew to considerable criticism in 
the West. Those of us who prize our values while understanding the com­
plexities of a new country in a different culture are prepared co leave it co 
hiscory co pass judgment as to whether there were other options available 
co him. But, for a generation, every American leader who has dealt with 
Lee Kuan Yew has benefited from the fact that, on international issues, he 
has identified the future of his country with the fate of the democracies. 
And he has done so not passively but by making a seminal political con­
tribution to the struggles of our time. 
Preface 
I wrote this book for a younger generation of Singaporeans who took sta­
bility, growth, and prosperity for granted. I wanted them to know how 
difficult it was for a small country of 640 sq. km with no natural resources 
to survive in the midst of larger, newly independent nations all pursuing 
nationalistic policies. 
Those who have been through the trauma of war in 1942 and the 
Japanese occupation, and have taken part in building a new economy for 
Singapore, are not so sanguine. We cannot afford to forget that public 
order, personal security, economic and social progress, and prosperity are 
not the natural order of things, that they depend on ceaseless effort and 
attention from an honest and effective government that the people must 
elect. 
In my earlier book, I described my formative years in prewar 
Singapore, the Japanese occupation, and the communist upheavals fol­
lowed by racial problems during our two years in Malaysia. 
The Japanese occupation (1942-1945) filled me with hatred for the 
cruelties they inflicted on their fellow Asians, aroused my nationalism 
and self-respect, and my resentment at being lorded over. My four years as 
a student in Britain after the war strengthened my determination to get 
rid of British colonial rule. 
I returned to Singapore in 1950, confident of my cause, but ignorant 
of the pitfalls and dangers that lay ahead. An anticolonial wave swept me 
and many others of my generation. I involved myself with trade unions 
XIV Preface 
and politics, formed a political party, and at the age of 35 assumed office 
in 1959 as the first prime minister of an elected government of self­
governing Singapore. My friends and I formed a united front with the 
communists. From the start we knew that there would have to be a part­
ing of the ways and a time for reckoning. When it came, the fight was 
bitter, and we were fortunate not to have been defeated. 
We believed the long-term future for Singapore was to rejoin Malaya, 
so we merged with it to form Malaysia in September 1963. Within a year, 
in July 1964, we suffered Malay-Chinese race riots in Singapore. We were 
trapped in an intractable struggle with Malay extremists of the ruling 
party, United Malay National Organisation (UMNO), who were intent on 
a Malay-dominated Malaysia. To counter their use of communal riots to 
cow us, we rallied the non-Malays and Malays throughout Malaysia in the 
Malaysian Solidarity Convention to fight for a Malaysian Malaysia. By 
August 1965 we were given no choice but to leave. 
The communal bullying and intimidation made our people willing to 
endure the hardships of going it alone. That traumatic experience of race 
riots also made my colleagues and me even more determined to build a 
multiracial society that would give equality to all citizens, regardless of 
race, language, or religion. It was an article of faith which guided our 
policies. 
This book covers the long, hard slog to find ways of staying indepen­
dent and making a living without Malaysia as our hinterland. We had to 
work against seemingly insuperable odds to make it from poverty to pros­
perity in three decades. 
The years after 1965 were hectic and filled with anxiety, as we strug­
gled to find our feet. We were relieved when we found in 1971 that we 
had created enough jobs to avoid heavy unemployment even though the 
British withdrew their forces from Singapore. But only after we weath­
ered the international oil crisis in 1973, with the quadrupling of oil 
prices, were we confident that we could make it on our own. Thereafter, it 
was hard work, planning, and improvising to establish ourselves as a 
viable nation linked by trade and investments to the major industrial 
countries, and as a successful hub for the dissemination of goods, services, 
and information in our region. 
Our climb from a per capita GDP of US$400 in 1959 (when I took 
Preface xv 
office as prime minister) to more than US$ l 2,200 in 1990 (when I 
stepped down) and US$22,000 in 1999 took place at a time of immense 
political and economic changes in the world. 
In material terms, we have left behind our Third World problems of 
poverty. However, it will take another generation before our arts, culture, 
and social standards can match the First World infrastructure we have 
installed. During the Cold War in the 1960s and 1970s, when it was far 
from clear which side would win, we aligned ourselves with the West. 
The Cold War divide made for a simpler international environment. 
Because our immediate neighbors were against the communists, we 
enjoyed both regional solidarity and international support from America, 
Western Europe, and Japan. By the late 1980s it was clear we were on the 
side of the victors. 
This is not a how-to book, whether to build an economy, an army, or a 
nation. It is an account of the problems my colleagues and I faced, and 
how we set about solving them. I wrote my earlier book as a chronological 
narrative. To do so for this volume would have made the book too long. I 
have written by themes, to compress 30 years into 700 pages. 
Acknowl edgments 
Andrew Tan Kok Kiong started research for these memoirs in 1995. He 
was an officer in the Singapore administrative service, seconded to 
Singapore Press Holdings (SPH) to help me. The prime minister, Goh 
Chok Tong, allowed me access to all records and documents in the gov­
ernment ministries and in the archives. The registry officer in the prime 
minister's office, Florence Ler Chay Keng, and her assistants, Wendy 
Teo Kwee Geok and Vaijayanthimala, were tireless and thorough in 
tracing files and documents. With the help of Pang Gek Choo, who 
worked for the Straits Times, and Alan Chong, a young political science 
graduate, Andrew searched through government records, minutes of 
important meetings, correspondence, and other relevant documents. 
Most useful were the notes I dictated immediately after meetings and 
conversations. 
Andrew Tan was able and resourceful. He coordinated the work of the 
researchers, organized the material, and made my task easier. Pang Gek 
Choo was quick and efficient in tracing reports of events and speeches in 
the Straits Times' library and archives. In 1997, when the work expanded, 
Walter Fernandez and Yvonne Lim from SPH and Dr. Goh Ai Ting from 
the National University of Singapore (NUS) joined my researchers. 
Panneer Selvan from the ministry of foreign affairs helped retrieve 
records of my dealings with foreign leaders. Lily Tan, director of the 
National Archives, produced many useful documents and oral history 
transcripts of those who had allowed me to read them. The staffs at the 
XV!ll Acknowledgments 
NUS library, the National Library, and the Straits Times editorial library 
were always helpful. 
John Dickie, former diplomatic correspondent of the Daily Mail, 
gave much valuable advice, especially on what would interest a British 
reader. My good friend Gerald Hensley, New Zealand's former high com­
missioner in Singapore and later secretary for defence, gave good sugges­
tions. 
Straits Times writers, Cheong Yip Seng (editor in chief), Han Fook 
Kwang, Warren Fernandez, Zuraidah Ibrahim, Irene Ng, and Chua Mui 
Hoong proposed many changes, making the book easier to read, espe­
cially for those without background knowledge of the events I described. 
Lim Jin Koon, editor of Zaobao, read through the whole draft before 
its translation into Chinese. Seng Han Thong, formerly of Zaobao, now in 
the National Trades Union Congress (NTUC), went through many ver­
sions of the drafts before finally settling the Chinese translation. 
Guntor Sadali, editor of Berita Harian, minister for community devel­
opment, Abdullah Tarmugi, senior parliamentary secretary Zainul Abidin 
Rasheed, and parliamentary secretaries Mohamad Maidin and Yaacob 
Ibrahim gave their views on all the chapters relating to Malays. I wanted 
to avoid unintentionally hurting Malay sensitivities and have tried hard 
not to do so. 
Old friends and colleagues, Goh Keng Swee, Lim Kim San, Ong 
Pang Boon, Othman Wok, Lee Khoon Choy, Rahim Ishak, Maurice 
Baker, Sim Kee Boon, S. R. Nathan (now our president), and Ngiam 
Tong Dow, read various parts of my drafts and corrected or confirmed my 
recollection of events. 
My drafts were also read by Kishore Mahbubani (permanent represen­
tative to the United Nations), Chan Heng Chee (ambassador to Washing­
ton), Bilahari Kausikan (deputy secretary, ministry of foreign affairs), 
Tommy Koh (ambassador at large), and Lee Tsao Yuan (director of the 
Institute of Policy Studies). Their valuable advice as diplomats, writers, 
and academics helped me give the book a better focus. 
Shova Loh, line editor in Times Editions, meticulously cleaned up the 
final draft. 
My three personal assistants, Wong Lin Hoe, Loh Hock Teck, and 
Koh Kiang Chay, worked tirelessly, often late into the evenings, to take in 
Acknowledgments XIX 
every amendment and check for accuracy. They went well beyond the call 
of duty. To all of them and others too numerous to name, I express my 
grateful thanks. The errors and shortcomings that remain are mine. 
As with the first volume, my wife, Choo, went through every page 
many times until she was satisfied that what I had written was clear and 
easy to read. 
The line editor at HarperCollins, New York, has meticulously Amer­
icanized my English. She has also made me politically gender correct. 
Wherever I wrote "man," he has become "person" or "people." I thank her 
for making me appear less of a male chauvinist to Americans. 
PART I 
Getting the Basics Right 
1. Going It Alone 
There are books to teach you how to build a house, how to repair engines, 
how to write a book. But I have not seen a book on how to build a nation 
out of a disparate collection of immigrants from China, British India, and 
the Dutch East Indies, or how to make a living for its people when its for­
mer economic role as the entrepot of the region is becoming defunct. 
I never had expected that in 1965, at 42, I would be in charge of an 
independent Singapore, responsible for the lives of its 2 million people. 
From 1959, when I was 35, I was prime minister of a self-governing state 
of Singapore. We joined the Federation of Malaysia in September 1963. 
There were fundamental disagreements over policies between Singapore 
and the federal government. All of a sudden, on 9 August 1965, we were 
out on our own as an independent nation. We had been asked to leave 
Malaysia and go our own way with no signposts to our next destination. 
We faced tremendous odds with an improbable chance of survival. 
Singapore was not a natural country but man-made, a trading post the 
British had developed into a nodal point in their worldwide maritime 
empire. We inherited the island without its hinterland, a heart without a 
body. 
Foreign press comments immediately after independence, all predict­
ing doom, added to my gloom. One writer compared Britain's withdrawal 
from its colonies to the decline of the Roman Empire when law and order 
collapsed as the Roman legions withdrew and barbarian hordes took over. 
Denis Warner wrote in the Sydney Morning Herald (10 August 1965), "An 
4 From Third World to First 
independent Singapore was not regarded as viable three years ago. 
Nothing in the current situation suggests chat it is more viable today." In 
the London Sunday Times (22 August 1965), Richard Hughes wrote, 
"Singapore's economy would collapse if the British bases-costing more 
than 100 million pounds sterling-were closed." I shared these fears but 
did not express chem: My duty was to give the people hope, not demoral­
ize chem. 
Indeed one question uppermost in my mind was how long the British 
would or could keep their bases in Singapore. Would their stay be short­
ened because of the way separation had taken place? Harold Wilson was 
already facing opposition from his backbenchers. The "east of Suez" policy 
was costly and did not help the Labour government win votes. They 
needed the money for welfare and ocher vote-winning programs. The only 
guarantor of security and stability in East Asia, the United States, was 
deeply mired in a guerrilla war in Vietnam which was extremely unpopu­
lar with their European allies and with African and Asian governments. 
Anti-American propaganda by the Soviets and the People's Republic of 
China was most effective in the Third World. I felt it would be politically 
costly, if not impossible, for Singapore to have the Americans cake over 
the role of the British. Australia and New Zealand on their own would 
not be credible guarantors. 
I feared chat slowly but inexorably British influence would decline, 
and American influence expand. For my generation born and bred in 
empire, it was not an easy change. I had to come to terms with American 
power without a British buffer. The British had enforced their will with a 
certain civility. The Americans were different, as I could see from the way 
they dealt with South Vietnamese leaders, and even with Thai and 
Filipino leaders who were not in as parlous a position as chose in Saigon. 
America was a power on the ascendant, with bulging muscles and a habit 
of flexing chem. 
There was the personal burden of tighter security. It was irksome. 
Immediately after separation, the police officer in charge of my security 
had warned me chat I had become the number one hate object in the 
Malaysian Malay-language newspapers and radio and television broad­
casts then circulating and receivable in Singapore. He advised me to move 
from my home on Oxley Road until they had made certain alterations to 
Going It Alone 5 
the house. I had a thick layer of security men instead of just one officer. 
He also extended discreet security cover for my wife Choo and the chil­
dren. The threat from racial fanatics was unpredictable, unlike that from 
the communists who were rational and calculating and would see no ben­
efit in going for Choo or our children. For three to four months, Choo and 
I stayed at Changi Cottage, a government chalet by the sea, near the RAF 
Changi airfield and inside a "protected" area. During that time, I held 
cabinet meetings irregularly, for the drive to my office at City Hall caused 
traffic disruption with the unaccustomed motorcycle outriders and a secu­
rity car. I took urgent decisions by telephone conference with the relevant 
ministers which gave me relief from interminable office meetings. My 
personal assistants and Wong Chooi Sen, my trusted cabinet secretary, 
came every day to the cottage from where I worked. Within walking dis­
tance was a nine-hole RAF golf course that provided a welcome break 
from the daily grind of papers and minutes. I would play nine holes, 
sometimes with a friend, at other times on my own, with Choo walking 
to keep me company. 
Our three children had to attend school, so they stayed at home and 
put up with the inconvenience of workers erecting a wall of bricks set in 
honeycomb pattern to screen off our front porch from the road. As a tem­
porary measure, until bullet-proof glass could be obtained, they also 
blocked our windows with steel plates. This made the rooms feel like 
prisons, and the whole family felt a tremendous sense of relief when the 
glass windows were finally installed months later. When I returned to 
Oxley Road, Gurkha policemen (recruited by the British from Nepal) 
were posted as sentries. To have either Chinese policemen shooting 
Malays or Malay policemen shooting Chinese would have caused wide­
spread repercussions. The Gurkhas, on the other hand, were neutral, 
besides having a reputation for total discipline and loyalty. All this 
heightened my sense of insecurity and underlined the urgency of building 
an army to protect our fragile independence. 
I had many pressing concerns: first, to get international recognition 
for Singapore's independence, including our membership in the United 
Nations (UN). I chose Sinnathamby Rajaratnam (affectionately called 
Raja by all of us) as foreign minister. He was eminently suitable, with 
anticolonial nationalist credentials from his student days in London 
6 From Third World to First 
before and during the war, but no rabid radical. Friendly, urbane, sincere, 
he had the right balance between standing up for principles and the need 
for diplomatic compromise. He was to be much liked and respected by all 
those he worked with at home and abroad. As messages of recognition 
flowed in, Toh Chin Chye, the deputy prime minister, and Raja as foreign 
minister set off to New York to take our seat at the UN that September 
of 1965. 
My next concern was to defend this piece of real estate. We had no 
army. Our two battalions were under the command of a Malaysian briga­
dier. How were we to build up some defense forces quickly, however rudi­
mentary? We had to deter and, if need be, prevent any wild move by the 
Malay Ultras (extremists) in Kuala Lumpur (KL) to instigate a coup by 
the Malaysian forces in Singapore and reverse the independence we had 
acquired. Many Malay leaders in KL believed that Singapore should never 
have been allowed to leave Malaysia, but should have been clobbered into 
submission. If anything were to happen to Tunku Abdul Rahman, the 
prime minister of Malaysia, Tun Abdul Razak would become the prime 
minister and he could be made to reverse the Tunku's decision by strong­
minded Ultra leaders. It was a time of great uncertainty . 
While wrestling with these major concerns, I had to attend to another 
pressing need-keeping law and order. We feared that pro-UMNO Malays 
would run amok when they realized they had been abandoned by the 
Malaysian government and were once again a minority. Our policemen 
were mostly Malays from the kampongs of Malaya and their loyalty would 
be strained if they had to take action against Malay rioters who wanted to 
rejoin Malaysia. Our troops, two battalions, were also mostly Malays from 
Malaya. 
To my relief, Goh Keng Swee was willing and eager to take on the 
task of building up the forces. I decided to have him take charge of home 
affairs and defense, put together into one ministry called MID (ministry 
of interior and defense). This would allow him to use the police force to 
help in the basic training of army recruits. (To this day, license plates of 
Singapore Armed Forces vehicles carry the letters MID.) Keng Swee's 
transfer left a void in the finance ministry. I discussed this with him and 
decided on Lim Kim San as finance minister. Kim San had a practical 
Going It Alone 7 
approach to problems. Moreover, he could work closely with Keng Swee 
without friction, thus allowing Keng Swee to contribute informally to 
policies on finance. 
My third and biggest headache was the economy-how to make a liv­
ing for our people? Indonesia was "confronting " us and trade was at a stand­
still. The Malaysians wanted to bypass Singapore and deal direct with all 
their trading partners, importers, and exporters, and only through their 
own ports. How was an independent Singapore to survive when it was no 
longer the center of the wider area that the British once governed as one 
unit? We needed to find some answers and soon, for unemployment was 
alarming at 14 percent and rising. Furthermore, we had to make a living 
different from that under British rule. I used to see our godowns [ ware­
houses) filled with rubber sheets, pepper, copra, and rattan and workers 
laboriously cleaning and grading them for export. There would be no more 
imports of such raw materials from Malaysia and Indonesia for processing 
and grading. We had to create a new kind of economy, try new methods and 
schemes never tried before anywhere else in the world, because there was no 
other country like Singapore. Hong Kong was the one island most like us, 
but it was still governed by the British and it had China as its hinterland. 
Economically, it was very much a part of China, acting as China's contact 
with the capitalist world for trade with noncommunist countries. 
After pondering these problems and the limited options available, I 
concluded an island city-state in Southeast Asia could not be ordinary if it 
was to survive. We had to make extraordinary efforts to become a tightly 
knit, rugged, and adaptable people who could do things better and 
cheaper than our neighbors, because they wanted to bypass us and render 
obsolete our role as the entrepot and middleman for the trade of the 
region. We had to be different. 
Our greatest asset was the trust and confidence of the people. These 
we had earned by the fight we had put up on their behalf against the com­
munists and the Malay Ultras, our refusal to be browbeaten and cowed at 
a time when the police and the army were both in the hands of the central 
government. The communists had jeered at my colleagues and me as run­
ning dogs of the colonialist imperialists, and cursed us as lackeys and 
henchmen of the Malay feudalists. But when things got bad, even the 
8 From Third World to First 
skeptical Chinese-speaking left-leaning types saw us, a group of bourgeois 
English-educated leaders, stand up for them and defend their interests. 
We were careful not to squander this newly gained trust by misgovern­
ment and corruption. I needed this political strength to maximize what 
use we could make of our few assets, a natural world-class harbor sited in 
a strategic location astride one of the busiest sea-lanes of the world. 
The other valuable asset we had was our people-hardworking, 
thrifty, eager to learn. Although divided into several races, I believed a 
fair and even-handed policy would get them to live peacefully together, 
especially if such hardships as unemployment were shared equally and not 
carried mainly by the minority groups. It was crucial to keep united 
Singapore's multilingual, multicultural, multireligious society, and make 
it rugged and dynamic enough to compete in world markets. But how to 
get into this market? I did not know the answer. Nobody had asked us to 
push the British out. Driven by our visceral urges, we had done so. Now 
it was our responsibility to provide for the security and livelihood of the 2 
million people under our care. We had to succeed, for if we failed, our 
only survival option would be a remerger, but on Malaysian terms, as a 
state like Malacca or Penang. 
I did not sleep well. Choo got my doctors to prescribe tranquilizers, 
but I found beer or wine with dinner better than the pills. I was then in 
my early forties, young and vigorous; however hard and hectic the day 
had been, I would take two hours off in the late afternoon to go on the 
practice tee to hit 50 to 100 balls and play nine holes with one or two 
friends. Still, I was short of sleep. Late one morning, when the newly 
arrived British high commissioner, John Robb, had an urgent message for 
me from his government, I received him at home lying in bed, physically 
exhausted. Harold Wilson, the British prime minister, must have been 
told of this for he expressed his concern. On 23 August 1965, I replied, 
"Do not worry about Singapore. My colleagues and I are sane, rational 
people even in our moments of anguish. We weigh all possible conse­
quences before we make any move on the political chessboard .... Our 
people have the will to fight and the stuff that makes for survival." 
While brooding over these daunting problems, on the night of 30 Sep­
tember 1965, alarm bells rang with the news of a coup in Indonesia. Pro-
Going It Alone 9 
communist officers had killed six Indonesian generals. A bloodbath fol­
lowed as General Suharto moved to put down the coup. These further 
uncertainties deepened my concerns. 
On that 9th day of August 1965, I had started out with great trepidation 
on a journey along an unmarked road to an unknown destination. 
2. Building an Army from Scratch 
When Parliament was due to open in December 1965, four months after 
our separation from Malaysia, Brigadier Syed Mohamed bin Syed Ahmad 
Alsagoff, who was in charge of a Malaysian brigade stationed in Singapore, 
called on me and insisted that his motorcycle outriders escort me to 
Parliament. Alsagoff was a stout, heavy-built Arab Muslim with a mous­
tache, a Singaporean by birth who had joined the Malayan Armed Forces. 
To my amazement, he acted as if he was the commander in chief of the 
army in Singapore, ready at any time to take over control of the island. At 
that time the First and Second Singapore Infantry Regiments (1 and 2 SIR) 
of about 1,000 men each were under Malaysian command. The Malaysian 
government had placed 700 Malaysians in 1 and 2 SIR, and posted out 
300 Singaporean soldiers to various Malaysian units. 
I weighed the situation and concluded that the Tunku wanted to 
remind us and the foreign diplomats who would be present that Malaysia 
was still in charge in Singapore. If I told him off for his presumptuous­
ness, Alsagoff would report this back to his superiors in Kuala Lumpur 
and they would take other steps to show me who wielded real power in 
Singapore. I decided it was best to acquiesce. So, for the ceremonial open­
ing of the first Parliament of the Republic of Singapore, Malaysian army 
outriders "escorted" me from my office in City Hall to Parliament House. 
Not long after this problem, at 4:00 P.M. on Tuesday, 1 February 1966, 
Keng Swee suddenly came to my office at City Hall with the troubling 
news that rioting had broken out at an army training depot at Shenton 
12 From Third World to First 
Way, next to the Singapore Polytechnic. When he learned to his astonish­
ment that 80 percent of recent recruits to all units were Malays, Keng 
Swee had given instructions that all recruitment and training should cease 
and the position be frozen. The army commander misinterpreted this and, 
on his own initiative, had instructed the Chinese major to discharge all 
Malay recruits. The major assembled everyone in the parade square, asked 
the non-Malays to fall out, and told the Malays that they were dismissed. 
For a few minutes, the Malays were dumbfounded at this discrimination. 
When they recovered from the shock, bedlam broke out as they attacked 
the non-Malays with poles, sticks, and aerated water bottles; burnt two 
motorcycles; damaged a scooter; and overturned a van. A police patrol car 
responding to an emergency call drove into a barrage of bottles and could 
not get past the overturned van. A fire engine that arrived later was simi­
larly attacked. 
A huge crowd gathered along Shenton Way to watch. Polytechnic 
students left their classes for a bird's-eye view of the melee from the bal­
conies and rooftop. At about 2:45 P.M., the riot squad arrived in their vans 
and lobbed tear-gas canisters into the crowd. Then specially trained riot 
police moved in, captured the rioters, bundled them into police vans, and 
took them across the road to the CID (Criminal Investigation Depart­
ment) building. They were held at the CID quadrangle pending instruc­
tions on whether to charge them and refuse bail, or to let them off on bail. 
Keng Swee feared that if they were allowed to go, they would start a 
riot between Malays and Chinese when they got home to Geylang Serai 
and other Malay areas and spread the story of how they had been dis­
missed. I immediately called the British high commissioner, John Robb, 
to my office. I asked him to alert the British military commander in case 
intercommunal riots got out of hand as the Singapore police and army 
were still nearly all Malays who would sympathize with the rioters. I told 
him that I intended to go to the CID building to sort the problem out 
myself. If it was possible to defuse it, I would let them go home; other­
wise, they might have to be charged and held on remand. In that case, 
some 365 families would miss their sons that night and rumors would 
spread throughout Singapore of the Malays being oppressed. 
John Robb said he would report the matter but was careful to point 
out that British forces could not interfere in an internal security problem. 
Buil ding an Army from Scratch 13 
I said the commander in chief or the officer in charge of the British garri­
son should ensure that British troops were ready to prevent rioters from 
becoming uncontrollable and turning against the white families as they 
did in the religious riot involving a Dutch girl in 1950. 
I tested out my approach on Othman Wok, the minister for social 
affairs, and had him accompany Keng Swee and me to meet the men at 
the CID. At the quadrangle, speaking to them in Malay through a hand­
held battery-powered loudspeaker, I said that the major had misunder­
stood his orders, which were to take on only Singapore citizens. He mis­
takenly thought this meant no Malays were to be recruited whereas 
Malays who were Singapore citizens were eligible. Ten of them identified 
as ringleaders of the riots would be detained and charged by the police, 
but the rest could go home. They were not to spread rumors when they 
got home. If any one of those allowed to go home was subsequently iden­
tified as a rioter, he would also be charged. I added that all those who 
were Singapore citizens had to report back to camp the following day for 
normal training. Only citizens were eligible and those who were not had 
to seek employment in Malaysia. The prospect of jobs brought applause 
and cheers. I had to make a decision on the spot; the least risky option was 
to hold and punish a few ringleaders but allow the majority to go home. I 
hoped they would behave themselves because of the prospect of jobs. 
At a press briefing, I asked the reporters to report the matter tactfully, 
especially in the Malay paper. When I read the newspapers the next morn­
ing, I heaved a sigh of relief. Fourteen men were charged with rioting but 
the attorney general later decided that it was best to withdraw the 
charges. This was a sharp reminder to the government that we had to deal 
with matters of race with the utmost sensitivity . 
We had another anxious time in November 1967 when Chinese­
Malay clashes broke out in Penang and Butterworth, a town on the penin­
sula opposite Penang island. The racial situation had deteriorated rapidly 
in Malaysia after Singapore's separation. Chinese anger and resentment 
were mounting against their government's Malay-language policy. It was 
sufficient ly alarming for us to form a ministerial committee, with Goh 
Keng Swee as chairman and top officials from the police and the army as 
members, to prepare contingency plans in case racial riots broke out in 
peninsular Malaysia and spilled over to Singapore. 
14 From Third World to First 
Tan Siew Sin, the Malaysian finance minister, had unwisely decided 
after the British pound was devalued that even for small change there 
would have to be an adjustment between the old coins issued by the 
British colonial government, which had been devalued by about 14 per­
cent, and the new Malaysian coins. This led to sporadic hartals (stoppage 
of work in protest), which in turn led to racial clashes. Chinese from rural 
areas were moving into the towns and we feared that if widespread racial 
conflicts broke out, the Malaysian armed forces would have difficulty 
dealing with trouble in many towns. 
Concern that these riots could involve Singapore forced us to build 
up our armor quickly. In January 1968, we decided to buy French-made 
AMX-13 light tanks that the Israelis were selling at discounted prices 
because they were upgrading their armor. Thirty refurbished tanks arrived 
by June 1969 and another 42 in September 1969. We also bought 170 
four-wheeled V200 armored vehicles. 
The British had made no offer to help us build an army as they had done 
with the Malayans in the 1950s. They had worked behind the scenes to 
get a fair deal for Singapore in Malaysia and incurred the displeasure of 
the Malaysians. Now they had to deal with a Malaysia more than a little 
unhappy with them. And because the Malaysians had sponsored us for 
membership both to the Commonwealth and the United Nations, the 
British must have guessed that the Malaysians would also want to be our 
military instructors, if for no other reason than to make sure we were not 
taught more than they knew about defense. 
We had to get back our two regiments and restore their Singapore 
identity to ensure their loyalty. Goh Keng Swee, then finance minister, 
had offered to be defense minister immediately at independence. He was 
willing to build an army from scratch, although all he knew of military 
matters was learned as a corporal in the British-led Singapore Volunteer 
Corps until it surrendered in February 1942. I told him to get going. 
Keng Swee contacted Mordecai Kidron, the Israeli ambassador in 
Bangkok, for help. A few days after separation on 9 August, Kidron flew 
in from Bangkok to offer assistance in military training, and Keng Swee 
Buildin g an Army from Scratch 15 
brought him to see me. Kidron had approached me several times in 
1962-1963 to ask for an Israeli consulate in Singapore. He had assured 
me the Tunku had agreed and that we need not wait until Malaysia was 
established. I replied that if the Tunku had agreed, there should be no 
trouble in setting it up after Malaysia was formed, but if I did so before 
that, I would create an issue that would excite the Malay Muslim grass­
roots and upset my plans for merger. He was disappointed. As I had 
expected, when Malaysia came about, the Tunku could not and did not 
allow an Israeli consulate. 
I listened to Kidron's proposal on military training but told Keng 
Swee to put it on hold until Lal Bahadur Shastri, the prime minister of 
India, and President Nasser of Egypt replied to my letters seeking their 
urgent help to build up our armed forces. 
I had written to Shastri for a military adviser to help us build up five 
battalions. Two days later, Shastri replied sending "sincere good wishes 
for the happiness and prosperity of the people of Singapore" but did 
not mention my request. Nasser, in his reply, extended recognition to 
Singapore as an independent and sovereign state, but he too did not refer 
to my request for a naval adviser to build up our coastal defense. I had half 
expected the Indian government might not want to take sides against 
Malaysia. India was after all a relatively close neighbor in Asia. But I was 
disappointed when Nasser, a good friend, opted out. Perhaps it was a case 
of Muslim solidarity with Malaysia's Muslim leaders. 
I told Keng Swee to proceed with the Israelis, but to keep it from 
becoming public knowledge for as long as possible so as not to provoke 
grassroots antipathy from Malay Muslims in Malaysia and Singapore. A 
small group of Israelis led by Colonel Jak Ellazari arrived in November 
1965, followed by a team of six in December. To disguise their presence, 
we called them "Mexicans." They looked swarthy enough. 
We had to have a credible force to protect ourselves. I had no fear of 
the Tunku changing his mind but other powerful Malay leaders, like Syed 
Ja'afar Albar who so strongly opposed separation that he had resigned as 
secretary-general of UMNO, might persuade Brigadier Alsagoff it was his 
patriotic duty to reverse separation. The brigadier with his brigade based 
in Singapore could have captured me and all my ministers without diffi-
16 From Third World to First 
culty. So we maintained a quiet, nonchallenging posture, while Keng Swee 
as defense minister worked feverishly co build up some defense capability. 
We faced another security risk from the racial composition of our army 
and police. Independent Singapore could not continue the old British 
practice of having a city three-quarters Chinese policed and guarded by 
Malay police and soldiers. The British had recruited mostly Malays born in 
Malaya, who traditionally had come co Singapore co enlist. Malays liked 
soldiering whereas the Chinese shunned it, a historical legacy of the preda­
tory habits of soldiers during the years of rebellions and warlords in China. 
The question was whether the army and police would be as loyal to a gov­
ernment no longer British or Malay, but one the Malays perceived as 
Chinese. We had to find some way co induct more Chinese and Indians 
into the police and armed forces co reflect the population mix. 
Shortly after separation, at the request of the Malaysian government, 
we had sent the 2nd battalion SIR to Sabah for Confrontation duties. We 
wanted to demonstrate our good faith and solidarity with Malaysia even 
though a formal defense treaty had not been concluded. This left their 
barracks, Camp Temasek, vacant. We then agreed co a Malaysian proposal 
chat one Malaysian regiment be sent down to Camp Temasek. The 2nd 
battalion SIR was due to return from its duties in Borneo in February 
1966, and arrangements were made at staff level for the Malaysian regi­
ment to withdraw . The Malaysian defense minister requested chat instead 
of reoccupying Camp Temasek, one Singapore battalion should be sent co 
the Malayan mainland co enable the Malaysian regiment to remain where 
it was. Keng Swee did not agree. We wanted both our own battalions in 
Singapore. We believed the Malaysians had changed their minds because 
they wanted co keep one battalion of Malaysian forces in Singapore co 
control us. 
The Malaysians refused co move out, so the SIR advance party had co 
live under canvas at Farrer Park. Keng Swee saw me co urgently warn chat 
if our troops were under canvas for coo long, with poor facilities for their 
mess and toilets, there was the risk of a riot or a mutiny. He compared 
himself co a British general in charge of troops the majority of whom were 
Italians. The Malaysians could cake advantage of chis and, through 
Brigadier Alsagoff, mount a coup. He advised me co move from my home 
Building an Army from Scratch 17 
on Oxley Road into the lstana Villa in the lstana domain and to post 
Gurkha police guards around just in case. For the next few weeks, my 
family and I stayed there with a company of Gurkhas on standby. 
Shortly afterward, the British vacated a camp called Khatib in the 
north of Singapore, near Sembawang. We offered it to the Malaysians and 
they agreed in mid-March 1966 to move out of our camp to Khatib, 
where they remained for 18 months before withdrawing of their own 
accord in November 1967. 
Their unreasonableness only made us more determined to build up 
the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) so that they could not intimidate us in 
this way. It stiffened our resolve and made us dig our heels in. 
Keng Swee, ever the intrepid fighter, had written in his paper to 
Defeo (Defence Council): 
It is foolish to allow ourselves to be hypnotised by the disparity in 
the population ratios between Singapore and her neighbours. 
What counts is the fighting strength of the armed forces, not the 
size of populations .... After five years of conscription we can 
field an army of 150,000 by mobilising those on the reserve 
service. By using older persons and women for non-combatant 
duties we should eventually be able to field an army with a com­
bat strength of 250,000 consisting of men between the ages of 
18 and 35. The war-making potential of a small, vigorous, well­
educated and highly motivated population should never be 
underestimated. 
This was an ambitious plan based on the Israeli practice of mobilizing 
the maximum number possible in the shortest time possible. We thought 
it important for people in and outside Singapore to know that despite our 
small population, we could mobilize a large fighting force at short notice. 
Ours was no easy task. We had to reorientate people's minds to accept 
the need for a people's army and overcome their traditional dislike for sol­
diering. Every Chinese parent knew the saying hao han bu dang bing, hao tie 
bu da ding (a good lad does not become a soldier, good steel does not 
become nails). We set up national cadet corps and national police cadet 
18 From Third World to First 
corps in all secondary schools so that parents would identify the army and 
police with their sons and daughters. We wanted the people to regard our 
soldiers as their protectors-a reversal from the days when army and police 
uniforms aroused fear and resentment as symbols of colonial coercion. 
People must admire military valor. As Keng Swee said in sorrow, 
"The Spartan approach to life does not come about naturally in a commu­
nity that lives by buying and selling." I had to get people to change their 
attitudes. We also had to improve the physical condition of our young by 
getting them to participate in sports and physical activity of all kinds, 
and to develop a taste for adventure and strenuous, thrilling activities that 
were not without danger to themselves. Persuasion alone was not enough. 
We needed institutions, well organized, well staffed, and well directed to 
follow up the exhortations and stirring speeches. The prime responsibility 
was that of the ministry of education. Only if we changed people's think­
ing and attitudes could we raise a large citizen army like Switzerland's or 
Israel's. We gave ourselves a decade to accomplish this. 
On the first anniversary of independence we mustered what little we 
had to boost our people's morale. We had organized the People's Defence 
Force (PDF) under the leadership of a motley collection of civil servants, 
members of parliament (MPs), and ministers who had been put through a 
crash officer-training course. The soldiers were civilians, mostly Chinese­
educated, recruited through the community centers. Several PDF pla­
toons marched on our first National Day celebrations, 9 August 1966. 
They put up a brave show and were cheered enthusiastically by those 
behind the saluting dais and by the crowds lining the streets as they rec­
ognized their suntanned ministers and MPs in uniform, eager in their 
stride if lacking in martial bearing. 
Our community leaders representing all races took part in the parade 
bearing banners or slogans. Chinese, Indian, Malay, and British business 
leaders joined in the contingent that marched past the president in front 
of City Hall. They were lustily cheered. There were units from the trade 
unions, the PAP, and the statutory boards. The police and fire brigade 
were brought in to add to the uniforms on display. The Malaysians might 
not have been in awe of our military capability , but they could not but be 
impressed by the determination and the spirit with which we were build­
ing up our defense forces to protect our fledgling state. 
Building an Army from Scratch 19 
Keng Swee's original plan was to build up a regular army of 12 bat­
talions between 1966 and 1969. Disagreeing with this plan, I proposed a 
small standing army plus the capacity to mobilize the whole civilian pop­
ulation who should be trained and put into reserves. Keng Swee argued 
that we had first to train a good number of regular officers and noncom­
missioned officers in his 12 battalions before we could train civilians on 
such a large scale. 
I did not want money spent on the recurrent costs of a large army: It 
was better spent on the infrastructure we needed to raise and train 
national service battalions. National service would bring political and 
social benefits. Keng Swee took the professional military view that an 
immediate threat from Malaysia had to be countered by a solid regular 
fighting force raised in the next three years. I said the Malaysians were 
unlikely to attack us while British and Commonwealth forces were in 
Singapore. Their presence would be a deterrent even without a defense 
treaty. I wanted the defense plan to aim at mobilizing as large a part of the 
population as possible, in order to galvanize the people in their own 
defense while they had this strong feeling of patriotism as a result of their 
recent experiences. 
A revised plan Keng Swee put up in November 1966 would mobilize 
a large section of the population and keep the regular component of the 
armed forces at 12 battalions. I was keen to have our women do national 
service as Israeli women did, because that would reinforce the people's 
will to defend themselves. But Keng Swee did not want his new ministry 
to carry this extra burden. As the other ministers in Defeo were also not 
anxious to draft our women, I did not press my point. 
The best deterrent to any Malaysian plan to regain control over 
Singapore was their knowledge that even if they could subdue our armed 
forces, they would have to keep down a whole people well trained in the 
use of arms and explosives. Besides integrating the people into a more 
united community through equal treatment of recruits regardless of their 
social background or race, we needed to attract and retain some of the best 
talents in the highest echelons of the SAF. Most important of all, we had 
to ensure that the SAF remained subordinate to the political leadership by 
keeping important functions such as manpower and finance under civilian 
officers in the defense ministry. Defeo endorsed all these objectives. 
20 From Third World to First 
In February 1967, I tabled legislation to amend the National Service 
Ordinance which had been passed by the British in 1952. Those who 
enlisted in the SAF as a full-time career would be guaranteed jobs in the 
government, statutory boards, or the private sector when they left full­
time service to go into the reserves. There was full public support when 
the bill was passed a month later. I recalled the first call-up in 1954 under 
this same ordinance and the riots by Chinese middle-school students. 
This time we had no problems getting 9,000 young men registered in the 
first batch. I was right about the changed public attitude. 
Meanwhile, Keng Swee assembled a team and, with Israeli help, 
started the buildup. He made use of police personnel, communications 
equipment, and other assets to kick-start the process. The assistant com­
missioner for police, Tan Teck Khim, became director general staff. 
We began training a select group in August 1967, the top 10 percent 
of the batch registered. To counter the traditional prejudice against sol­
diery, we held send-off ceremonies for the recruits from community cen­
ters in every constituency. MPs, ministers, and community leaders would 
attend and make short speeches before the recruits mounted the military 
trucks that took them to basic training camps. Over the years, we gradu­
ally broke down the resistance to soldiering. 
It was a crash program with everybody on crash courses. There was 
much confusion. Arrangements were never 100 percent prepared and cri­
sis management was the order of the day, but it was an urgent and crucial 
task that had to be accomplished in the shortest possible time. We had to 
achieve it with men of little experience and unexceptional ability. But the 
esprit de corps was excellent and they made progress. 
While we made haste in the buildup, we had another uneasy period in 
October 1968, after two Indonesian commandos were hanged for killing 
three Singapore citizens when they exploded a bomb at the Hongkong & 
Shanghai Bank in Orchard Road in 1964. When their appeals were dis­
missed by the Privy Council in London, Indonesian President Suharto 
sent his close aide, a brigadier general, to petition our president for clem­
ency and to commute the death sentence to imprisonment. 
Building an Army from Scratch 21 
The cabinet had met earlier to decide what advice to give the presi­
dent. We had already released 43 Indonesians detained for offenses com­
mitted during Confrontation. In response to Indonesian pleas we had also 
released two Indonesians convicted and sentenced to death for carrying a 
time bomb in Singapore. But these persons had been arrested before they 
could do harm, unlike the other case, where three civilians had been killed. 
We were small and weak. If we yielded, then the rule of law not only 
within Singapore but between our neighbors and Singapore would become 
meaningless as we would always be open to pressure. If we were afraid to 
enforce the law while British forces were still in Singapore, even though 
they had announced that they would be withdrawing by 1971, then our 
neighbors , whether Indonesia or Malaysia, could walk over us with 
impunity after 1971. So we decided not to abort the due process of law by 
acceding to the petition. The two men were hanged on 17 October. I was 
in Tokyo then on an official visit. Some 20 to 30 Indonesians gathered near 
the Geihinkan (the Japanese government guesthouse) carrying placards 
and banners in protest when I drove by. 
In Jakarta, an Indonesian crowd rampaged through the Singapore 
embassy, shattering pictures of the president of Singapore and generally 
wreaking havoc, but did not burn the embassy as they had done to the 
British. Our ambassador, P. S. Raman, formerly the director of Radio & 
Television Singapore, was a stout-hearted Tamil Brahmin and a Christian 
convert. He and his staff held themselves up with the same aplomb and 
defiance as Andrew Gilchrist, the British ambassador, had done when 
Indonesians rampaged through the British embassy in 1963. But unlike 
Gilchrist, the Singapore embassy staff did not have a bagpiper to add 
panache to a display of sangfroid. 
The next day, ABRI, the Indonesian armed forces, announced that 
they would hold maneuvers in their territorial waters off the Riau islands 
close to Singapore. The Indonesian marine commander said that he would 
personally lead a task force to invade Singapore. A thousand student 
demonstrators called on the commander of the Indonesian East Java forces 
to take revenge against Singapore. The press reported that the Indonesian 
army believed communist China had pressured Singapore to hang the two 
men. A week later, the Indonesian government announced a curtailment 
22 From Third World to First 
of trade with Singapore, imposing restrictions on exports. Our intelli­
gence assessed chat while there would be no open aggression, sabotage 
was probable. In any event, none cook place. 
It was a more serious crisis when a tense racial situation enveloped 
Singapore following bloody race riots in Kuala Lumpur on 13 May 1969, 
a few days after their general election. It spread alarm among both 
Chinese and Malays in Singapore; everyone feared chat the racial clashes 
would spill into Singapore, and they did. Malaysian Chinese who had fled 
co Singapore recounted stories of brutalities inflicted on their relatives 
there. As news spread of Malay atrocities and the bias of the Malaysian 
armed forces in dealing with the situation, anger and alarm rose in 
Singapore. 
Taking advantage of their greater numbers in Singapore, the Chinese 
took revenge for what had happened in Kuala Lumpur. On 19 May, 20 to 
30 Chinese youths assaulted several Malays in a Malay area near Sultan 
Mosque at Sultan Gate. When I returned co Singapore from America on 
20 May, I was cold chat a Malay had been shoe and killed by a group of 
chugs not very far from Raffles Institution. The clashes went on intermit­
tently for several weeks. 
On 1 June, I visited the Malay settlement at Geylang Serai, the site of 
serious race clashes. Lim Kim San as minister of defense accompanied me 
in a Land Rover driven by a Malay policeman, with the police superinten­
dent for the area sitting beside the driver. Boch Kim San and I immedi­
ately noticed the sullen, unfriendly looks of our SIR Malay soldiers 
deployed on the ground. Even the police superintendent, a Malay officer I 
had known personally for several years, looked sour. I felt strongly chat 
something was amiss. I sensed chat the Malays were terrified. The situa­
tion was different from the 1964 race riots when the police and army, 
largely Malays, were controlled by Malay leaders in Kuala Lumpur and 
had been especially protective of the Malays and punitive coward the 
Chinese. This time the Malays in Singapore were fearful. Although the 
police were still largely Malay, Singapore's Chinese leaders who were now 
in charge of the government might be against chem and direct the police 
and army accordingly. I was determined co make it clear to all, in particu­
lar the Chinese, now the majority, that the government would enforce the 
law impartially regardless of race or religion. 
Buil ding an Army from Scratch 23 
Because of strong police action, 684 Chinese and 349 Malays were 
arrested but there was not enough evidence to proceed against all. Only 
36 persons were charged in court, 18 Chinese and 18 Malays. The most 
serious charge was against a Chinese for attempted murder. He was found 
guilty and sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment. One Chinese and 3 
Malays had been killed, 11 Chinese and 49 Malays injured. 
We were shocked to find how race relations in Singapore had become 
so polarized. Even Malays who had served in our police and armed forces 
for many years had become very race conscious, easily swayed by racial 
pulls during the race riots in Malaysia. 
I wanted to be sure chat the police and army were not weakened by 
communal pulls. I also wanted an explanation why so many Malay sol­
diers were deployed in Geylang Serai where a Chinese minority would 
have been more reassured by a mixed-race force. I decided we had to 
review the racial mix of new recruits in the SAE 
Kim San looked into this and found that in spite of the 1966 incident 
at the Shenton Way army training depot, we had overrecruited Malays into 
the SAE George Bogaars, then permanent secretary of the defense ministry 
and one of our most trusted officers, had been director of Special Branch 
where he learned to distrust the Chinese-educated because nearly all 
communists were Chinese-educated. He preferred Malays when recruit­
ing noncommissioned officers and warrant officers for the SAF to train 
our national servicemen, believing the Chinese-educated were prone to 
Chinese chauvinism and communism. This bias had to be redressed, a sen­
sitive task that we entrusted to a team headed by Bogaars. A young lieu­
tenant colonel, Edward Yong, implemented a plan that over several years 
reduced the proportion of Malays, mainly by recruiting more non-Malays. 
I had invited the five-power Commonwealth defense ministers (Malaysia, 
Britain, Australia, New Zealand) to attend our celebrations for the 150th 
anniversary of the founding of Singapore. Razak, representing Malaysia, 
attended our National Day parade on 9 August 1969. Kim San arranged 
for a squadron of AMX-13 tanks and V200 armored vehicles to roll past 
in the parade. It had a dramatic effect on the people in Johar when they 
saw it on television that night, and elsewhere in Malaysia the following 
24 From Third World to First 
day in their newspapers which carried photos of the tanks. The Malaysians 
had no tanks then. At my dinner that night, Razak told Keng Swee that 
many people in Malaysia were concerned over our armor, but he himself 
was not. He said there was anxiety in Johor whether Singapore intended 
to invade the state and suggested that Kim San as defense minister should 
go to Kuala Lumpur to convince people that Singapore's intentions 
toward Malaysia were not hostile. Keng Swee's note to Defeo concluded, 
"One bright spot in this whole melancholy episode [the race riots in 
Kuala Lumpur] is the salutary effect our armour has had on the Malay 
political base." 
It was as well that we had decided to buy tanks and armored vehicles. 
The 13 May 1969 race riots in Kuala Lumpur polarized race relations in 
Malaysia, resurrecting my fear that with Tun Abdul Razak now in charge 
and the Malay Ultras on the ascendant, the Tunku could be shunted aside, 
and the Ultra leaders could decide to send the army marching down to 
take Singapore back into the Federation forcibly. I asked Yong Pung How 
(my friend from Cambridge days then living in Kuala Lumpur, later chief 
justice of Singapore) when he visited Singapore what the Malaysian pub­
lic's perception of the SAF was. He said that in 1966, people thought it 
was all a joke. But this was no longer the case. Word had passed round the 
cocktail circuit in Kuala Lumpur that the Singapore Armed Forces 
Training Institute (SAFT!) trained good soldiers and British high com­
mission officials had confirmed this. 
By 1971, we had 1 7 national service battalions (16,000 men), with 
14 battalions (11,000 men) in the reserves. We had infantry and com­
mando units; artillery units with mortars; a battalion each of tanks, 
armored personnel carriers, field engineers, signals, field maintenance, 
field hospital, and field supply; and a heavy transport company. We had 
established schools for basic military training and officer cadets, the 
artillery, engineers, bomb disposal units, and naval training. Our air force 
had a squadron each of Hunters, Strikemaster trainer aircraft, Alouette 
helicopters, and transport aircraft. 
Until we could achieve a credible defense capability in the 1970s, we 
had to rely on the British military presence. We had hoped they would 
stay on for 5 to 10 years, to provide a shield behind which we could build 
Buildin g an Arm y from Scratch 25 
up our own forces. But the British announced their withdrawal in January 
1968. This forced us to try to build up one fighter squadron and a small 
navy capable of coastal defense against infiltrators before they left in 
1971. These modest objectives drew down considerable resources from 
our strapped economy with limited trained manpower. We sent our first 
batch of six trainee pilots to Britain for training in August 1968, seven 
months after the withdrawal announcement. By September 1970, we had 
one squadron of 16 fighter planes (Hawker Hunters) operational in 
Singapore. 
The Israelis helped us plan our naval buildup and the New Zealanders 
trained our sailors for our fast patrol boats. Two squadrons of three boats 
each were operational in less than two years. Then we progressed to mis­
sile gunboats. 
While the Israelis were competent, not only in transmitting military 
skills but also in imparting the doctrines upon which they based their 
training, their methods were the exact opposite of the British who had 
built 1 and 2 SIR in a gradual step-by-step approach, training the officer 
corps from platoon commanders to company commanders and finally, 
after 15 or 20 years, to battalion commanders and lieutenant colonels. 
The Israelis insisted from the very start that our officers learn from them 
and take over as instructors as soon as possible. Unlike the Americans 
who, under President Kennedy, sent about 3,000 to 6,000 men in the 
first batch of "advisers" to help Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem 
build up the South Vietnamese army, the Israelis sent us only 18 officers. 
Every job they did was understudied by a Singaporean counterpart, from 
platoon commanders to company commander , up to director general staff. 
We co-opted police officers and former Singapore Volunteer Corps officers 
from British days, those with some military or paramilitary experience. 
Some were government servants, others were from the private sector. We 
offered them full-time appointments. The British army placed great store 
on spit and polish and square bashing to inculcate discipline and obedi­
ence to orders from superiors. The Israelis emphasized military skills and 
high motivation. Smartness on parade and military tattoo, the SAF never 
learned from the "Mexican s." Whatever smartness the SAF had came from 
British officers in charge of 1 and 2 SIR in their early years. 
26 From Third World to First 
Once the Israeli officers led by Ellazari had started work and he had 
us hooked, Kidron demanded a quid pro quo, that Singapore recognize 
Israel officially and exchange ambassadors. He was persistent in pressing 
for this. I told Keng Swee that this was a nonstarter. We would anger the 
Malay Muslims in Singapore and Malaysia whose sympathies were with 
their Muslim brothers, the Palestinians and the Arabs. We could not 
agree to do this even if the Israelis decided to withdraw. When they knew 
that it was a nonstarter, Tel Aviv sent a message that they understood our 
position and they would be helpful, but that they hoped we would even­
tually allow them an embassy in Singapore. 
When the Arab-Israeli Six-Day War broke out in June 1967, we were 
relieved the Israelis were not defeated or our SAF would have lost confi­
dence in their Israeli instructors. When the UN General Assembly was 
debating the resolution to condemn Israel, Rajaratnam, our foreign min­
ister and an Afro-Asian champion , was all for it. Keng Swee saw me to 
press Raja to direct our UN delegate not to vote in favor of the resolution 
or the Israelis would leave. 
As I could not attend the cabinet meeting, I stated my position in a 
note. We had to stand up for the right of small nations to exist. Freedom of 
navigation of all international highways, such as the Straits of 1iran and the 
Straits of Malacca, were vital and the UN should play a role in preserving 
peace or resolving the problem after hostilities. I added that I did not 
believe the Israeli advisers would leave even if we were to vote for the Afro­
Asian resolution. I was in favor of abstaining in the vote. The cabinet agreed 
with my view. We abstained and the Israelis did not leave. However, now 
that the Israeli presence in Singapore was well known, we allowed them a 
diplomatic mission. They wanted an embassy. We decided to allow them 
a trade representative office first, in October 1968. The following May, after 
Malay Muslims in Singapore and the region had become accustomed to an 
Israeli presence, we allowed them to upgrade it to an embassy. 
Our reservists had to be ever ready for combat. We changed their title 
in 1994 from "reservists" to "operationally ready NS men" to emphasize 
their combat readiness. For a few weeks each year, they do in-camp train­
ing in their same units to build up camaraderie. Once every few years, 
Buil ding an Arm y from Scratch 27 
they are sent to Taiwan, Thailand, Brunei, or Australia for brigade-level 
field exercises or battalion-level live firing exercises. Annual in-camp 
training is taken seriously by everyone, including employers who have to 
lose the services of their executives and men for a few weeks each year. 
To be effective, the SAF has to mobilize and involve the whole society 
in defense activities. So, school principals, teachers, parents, employers, 
and community leaders are brought into a supporting network under a 
concept called "Total Defense." This keeps morale high. 
National service has had a profound impact on Singapore society over 
the last 30 years. It has become a rite of passage for our young men and 
a part of our way of life that has helped to unify our people. They learn 
to live and work closely with each other, regardless of race, language, or 
religion. Food taboos of Muslims and Hindus are respected, as are all 
religious rites, from Buddhist , Hindu, Muslim, Sikh to Christian and 
Zoroastrian. Whether your father is a minister, banker, professional, 
laborer, taxi driver, or hawker, your military standing depends on your 
performance. 
To have both brains and brawn, Keng Swee and I started to induct some 
of our ablest students into the SAF in 1971. We selected some of the best 
officer cadets each year for SAF overseas scholarships to study at Oxbridge 
and other universities in Britain where they did a full academic course in 
the humanities, sciences, engineering, or the professions. During their 
student years they received full pay as lieutenants, besides a scholarship 
that paid for all fees, board and lodging, and other needs abroad. They 
had to sign a bond to serve for eight years after graduation. But within 
that period, they would be sent to America or Britain on two, often three 
courses: first, specialist training whether in artillery, armor, or signals; in 
midcareer, staff and command in America or Britain; and finally a course 
in public or business administration at a top American university such as 
Harvard or Stanford. 
At the end of eight years, they could opt to stay in the SAF, transfer to 
the public service as administrative officers, the top grade of civil ser­
vants, join a statutory board, or leave for the private sector. They would 
do their annual national service training of two to three weeks. Through 
28 From Third World to First 
this scheme, which I proposed and Keng Swee refined, we recruited some 
of our best students into the SAF. Without a yearly intake of about 10 of 
our best students, the SAF would have the military hardware but without 
the brainpower to use them to best advantage. 
The quality of the early batches was reassuring. By 1995, four former 
SAF scholars, having risen to senior positions, entered politics and later 
became cabinet ministers: my son, Brigadier General Lee Hsien Loong, 
Brigadier General George Yeo, Lieutenant Colonel Lim Hng Kiang, and 
Rear Admiral Teo Chee Hean. 
Singapore's limited size was a severe constraint. As our buildup expanded, 
we needed training areas overseas to deploy a brigade, and later a division. I 
made a breakthrough in 1975 when President Chiang Ching-kuo allowed 
our infantry, armor, and artillery to train in Taiwan. We also held combined 
arms exercises in Taiwan with Siegfried Schulz, a retired general of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, who accompanied our senior officers on "staff 
rides" to teach them the finer points of field maneuvers. 
President Marcos and the U.S. Defense Department allowed the 
Republic of Singapore Air Force to use U.S. training facilities at Clark Air 
Base in the late 1970s. When the Americans left Clark in the 1990s, we 
moved our training to Australia and America. We had to find unconven­
tional solutions to our problems. 
A country's defense capability has to be continually upgraded as new 
technology, especially information technology , is incorporated into 
weapons systems. This requires a sound economy that can afford to pay for 
new weaponry and a highly educated and trained people who can inte­
grate the various arms into one system and operate them efficiently and 
effectively . 
A credible defense capability helps to lower the risk of rash political 
acts. Whenever they were displeased with us, Malaysian leaders regularly 
uttered threats in the press to cut off our water supply. 
In 1990, when I stepped down as prime minister, Military Technology, 
an international defense journal, wrote, "In 1965, when Singapore became 
an independent nation, it had virtually nothing in the way of armed forces 
to defend itself. By 1990, the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) had grown 
Buildin g an Arm y from Scratch 29 
into a respected and professional force operating modern defence systems 
that was capable of defending the territorial integrity and independence 
of the state." Since then, the SAF's capability and readiness have contin­
ued to be rated highly by defense journals includingj ane's and Asia Pacific 
Defence Reporter. 
Such an outcome was far from my thoughts in April 1966 when I 
flew to London hoping for assurance from Prime Minister Harold Wilson 
that British forces would remain in Singapore for some years. 
3. Britain Pulls Out 
Denis Healey laughed when Keng Swee and I asked him in October 1966 
to sell us a squadron of Hawker Hunter fighter aircraft. He wagged his 
finger at us and asked what we were up to; British forces would look after 
us. We left London reassured that the Royal Air Force (RAF) would stay 
in Singapore. 
We badly needed the confidence British forces generated. If they were 
to leave suddenly before we had any capacity to defend ourselves, I did not 
think we could survive. Their presence gave people a sense of security, 
without which we would not get investments and be able to export our 
goods and services. That was the only way we could create enough jobs to 
absorb our school leavers and prevent massive unemployment. In January 
that year I had met Harold Wilson, the British prime minister, at an emer­
gency Commonwealth prime ministers' conference in Lagos on Rhodesia's 
unilateral declaration of independence. In between meetings, we discussed 
the future of British forces in Singapore. He told me that he might have to 
take away 25,000 of the 50,000 troops guarding Malaysia. Although he 
said no decision had yet been made, my impression was that he was mov­
ing toward troop reduction. 
To get a better understanding of British intentions, I visited London 
in April 1966 to discuss their defense planning. It was disturbing to dis­
cover a growing lobby for withdrawal from east of Suez, both in the 
Labour and Conservative parties and among their top leader writers and 
commentators. Healey (corroborated by the British press) said that there 
32 From Third World to First 
were strong advocates in the cabinet for a quick phased withdrawal, with 
George Brown, no. 2 to Wilson, leading the group. Paul Johnson, the 
New Statesman editor, went so far as to name the year, 1968. This point of 
view would easily win support from the Labour Party and Labour MPs. 
Iain Macleod, a former Conservative minister and now the shadow minis­
ter for finance and economic affairs, told me that there were many 
"Europeans" (those favoring integration with Europe) in his party who 
were keen on withdrawal. 
Wilson, I felt, was committed, at least over this term of office, to 
carry on with Singapore and Malaysia, and there must have been a quid 
pro quo from the Americans for Britain to stay. Friendly ambassadors told 
me that the Americans were helping the British to support the value of 
the pound sterling, on condition that the British continued to maintain 
their presence east of Suez. The Americans had good reasons to want the 
British to stay. By January 1966, their forces in South Vietnam had 
reached 150,000, and the U.S. Air Force was bombing selected targets in 
North Vietnam. Later George Brown confirmed to me that the "quid" 
was U.S. support for the British pound sterling, then overvalued and 
under pressure. 
Denis Healey, the defense secretary, was the most important leader I 
had to meet after Wilson. I liked him personally. He had a powerful intel­
lect, like a computer which kept on putting out new solutions as more 
data was fed in, ready to abandon fundamental positions taken earlier. His 
supple mind and facility with words made him a congenial dinner com­
panion, full of interesting and useful gossip about people I wanted to 
know more about. But he could be biting in his assessments. He once said 
of a Commonwealth prime minister, pointing to both sides of his fore­
head, "He is wood from here to here." 
From him I had a good rundown of the position of the Labour minis­
ters. He believed it was possible but difficult for the British government 
to maintain its military presence in the Far East into the 1970s. In the 
cabinet, most ministers favored a phased withdrawal within the next five 
years; only Harold Wilson, Michael Stewart, and Healey himself-"a for­
midable combination"-were keen on keeping British forces east of Suez 
in the next decade. I was reassured, for I had met Michael Stewart, the for­
eign secretary, and found him a steady, dependable man. 
Britain Pulls Out 33 
Healey said there was a strong body of opinion in the Labour Party that 
wanted complete withdrawal of British forces from their overseas commit­
ments, believing these forces in the Far East to be less an instrument for the 
maintenance of peace and security, and more a cat's-paw in the squabbles of 
regional governments. He warned that Britain's military policy on the Far 
East might well change in the life of the present government. This uncer­
tainty over the duration of their military presence was a constant worry. 
Keng Swee and I agreed that whatever the British finally decided, we had to 
build up a visible defense capability as soon as possible, to make it apparent 
to our people and our neighbors that we were not defenseless. 
The day before my departure, on Monday, 25 April, I had a final 
meeting with Harold Wilson. He asked about the contribution of British 
bases to the economy of Singapore. I assessed it at about 20 percent of the 
gross domestic product (GDP). A rundown of the bases would result in 
the repatriation of appreciable numbers of Malaysians and Indians. This 
would be a dislocation of the economy, but I feared most the effect on the 
morale of our people. It had taken immense effort to get them "off the 
fence" and to convince them that communism was not the inexorable 
wave of the future. The withdrawal of British troops and the closure of the 
bases would lead to a serious erosion of morale. People could be resigned 
to the inevitability of China's might. 
I concluded that Wilson and his government could not do much to 
help Singapore settle its defense and economic treaty with Malaysia. Their 
influence had declined, especially with the easing of Confrontation by 
Indonesia. The visit was as satisfactory as I could have hoped. All the 
British leaders, particularly Wilson and Healey, stressed that they were 
badly shaken by the separation, that we should not have taken so drastic a 
step without consulting them, and at a time when they were defending us 
against Indonesia's Confrontation. There was a great deal of heart search­
ing then as to whether they should stay on in Southeast Asia. They under­
lined it to emphasize the gravity of the situation. For the immediate 
future, I was reassured that Singapore had friends in the Labour govern­
ment and in the opposition Conservative Party leadership. It would give 
us a few years-time, I hoped, to get some defense forces built up, revive 
our economy, resume trade with Indonesia, and, most important of all, 
get investments in industry. 
34 From Third World to First 
Wilson showed friendliness in every way during the week I spent in 
London that April. He had given me lunch at 10 Downing Street with 
key cabinet ministers and Opposition House of Lords leader, Peter 
Carrington, and their wives present. In an impromptu speech, he spoke in 
the warmest terms. In reply I thanked him for his friendship and support. 
Soon after I left London, Wilson came under pressure from his Labour 
Party to cut back on overseas defense commitments. At a Parliamentary 
Labour Party meeting in June 1966, he had to appeal to their socialist 
sentiments: 
Frankly if we had only ourselves to think of, we would be glad to 
leave Singapore as quickly as possible. We cannot, however, say, 
as we do in Aden, that we are not wanted by the local govern­
ment and local population. Lee Kuan Yew, as good a left-wing 
and democratic socialist as any in this room, certainly wants us to 
stay there. Let us remember in the political battles of Southeast 
Asia and in his own electoral struggles he has shown tremendous 
courage in fighting communism in an area the communists 
would dearly like to control. 
The government of Singapore as we understand it, is the only 
democratic socialist government, as we understand the phrase, in 
Southeast Asia. 
His social record, in his housing programme for example, 
defies challenge in anything that has been done in the most 
advanced social democratic communities. 
After London, I attended a Socialist International conference in 
Stockholm to keep in touch with British and European socialist party 
leaders. There I met George Brown over lunch. He spoke in frank and 
blunt terms; he wanted to pull out from Southeast Asia, the sooner the 
better. He admitted that he was in a minority, but he intended to persist. 
Brown said Wilson and Healey had a warm regard for me and the 
Singapore government, but he was fed up that this was made an excuse for 
British policy east of Suez. He had wanted to include a firm declaration to 
pull out in a defense review published in October 1965, but had been 
outvoted. I argued that if Britain had pulled out, the Americans would 
Britain Pulls Out 35 
not have backed sterling. Then the pound would have been devalued and 
Labour would have lose the second election. He muttered resentfully chat 
the Lyndon Johnson-Harold Wilson agreemen t would do Britain no good 
in the long run. 
In July 1966, Healey visited Singapore and told me that troop levels 
in Singapore and Malaysia would be cut to the position they would have 
been if there were no Confrontation. He had been to Kuala Lumpur. With 
a straight face, he said he had told the press that there was no anti-British 
feeling there and no reason ocher than Britain's economic difficulties had 
prevented aid co Malaysia. He winked and said the Malaysians had 
learned chat what he called their "Hate Britain Month" had caused a bad 
impression and was counterproductive. The Malaysian leaders had reacted 
angrily co criticism in the British media of their race and language poli­
cies and they had gone sour over the British. By the time he arrived, it 
was "Love Britain Month." 
He was jovial, full of bonhomie, and reassuring. There were times 
when I felt chat che British would be able co stay for a decade, into the 
1970s. At ocher moments, I feared chat time was fast running out on 
Wilson and Healey. The mood among British Labour MPs was strongly in 
favor of cutting defense spending overseas co concentrate resources on 
Britain itself. 
Healey made a second visit to Singapore on 22 April 1967. He made 
clear chat Britain would be out of mainland Asia by the lace 1970s. I 
urged chat confidence in the general security of the area be maintained 
and that there should be no sudden changes. 
Healey explained chat the decision to pull out had been made for eco­
nomic, not military, reasons and was therefore unlikely to be changed. 
There was no ocher way of resolving Britain's financial problem. There 
was also fear of Britain becoming involved in a "Vietnam" war. The 
British were aghast at the bloodletting in Vietnam. 
Ac another meeting, two days later, he tried to soften the blow by 
talking of significant aid co Singapore; after all, he was talking about cuts, 
not total withdrawal. He realized the significance of the confidence factor 
and would cry co persuade his colleagues on chis. But he had co make 
long-term plans for British defense and it was not possible to do chat bit 
by bit. He asked about our plans for the naval dockyard. I cold him of our 
36 From Third World to First 
intention to have Swan & Hunter (a British firm of shipbuilders) take 
over and "civilianize" it and that I had already persuaded them to take 
over our civilian Keppel dockyard, to familiarize themselves with our 
conditions . 
Both Harold Holt, the prime minister of Australia, and Keith 
Holyoake, the prime minister of New Zealand, hacl. cabled to warn me 
that heavy reductions in British forces were under consideration and that 
this would lead to disengagement and dismantlement of the existing 
framework of Commonwealth defense arrangements. 
Among the British military commanders in Singapore there was no 
expectation of a precipitate withdrawal. In May, a month after Healey's 
visit, Keng Swee and I had a working dinner with Sir Michael Carver, 
British commander in chief Far East. Carver was most reassuring. He said 
the principal role of Singapore 's defense forces should be the prevention of 
a coup from within or from the outside. In the event of sustained hostili­
ties, we would have to depend on allies. His attitude ass•.ued me that he 
expected British forces to stay in Singapore for some time. 
In case Carver's political masters were thinking otherwise or were 
under pressure to do the unthinkable, I wrote to Harold Wilson on 26 
May that any talk about "significant aid" had ominous implications. The 
danger of economic dislocation was secondary compared to the grave dan­
ger of damaged confidence when it became known that the British had 
decided to move out by the mid-l 970s. Wilson sent a comforting reply 
and then invited me to London for preliminary talks. 
When Keng Swee and I met Healey in June 1967, he gave a detailed 
list of the force reductions up to 31 March 1968 and the rundown from 
1968 to 1971. After 1971, Britain would have an amphibious force in 
Southeast Asia, a sort of "policeman on the beat." 
Discussions on the economic implications were handled by Keng 
Swee. Like me, he was more worried over the security than the economic 
implications of a rundown of British forces. We both felt that we could 
somehow manage the economic rundown if we had security and confi­
dence was not shaken. I asked an official from the ministry of overseas 
development who had dealt with problems related to the rundown of 
British forces in Malta whether abandoned airfields could be put to civil­
ian use. In British experience, he said, abandoned airfields were either 
Britain Pulls Out 37 
reverted to agriculture or in a few instances made available for light 
industry. I did not think agriculture or light industry at all promising for 
Singapore and asked that our Economic Development Board be given 
early access to the three British airfields, Tengah, Seletar, and Changi, to 
decide how we could use them later. 
British military regulations required them to destroy surplus military 
equipment, but Healey agreed to revise the regulations so that such 
equipment could be handed over to Singapore for training and other uses. 
He and his team bent over backward to help. These two meetings were a 
great relief. We felt confident we could sort out our problems by the mid­
l 970s. I could not have asked for more. Swan & Hunter had confirmed 
that the prospects for the naval dockyard at Sembawang were very good, 
and a committee comprising the Navy Department, Swan & Hunter, and 
the Singapore government could plan its conversion to commercial use. 
In a private discussion on 26 June 1967, Wilson promised that this 
would be the last defense review for the present Parliament. Healey sepa­
rately also promised that there would be no further defense reviews. My 
impression was that Wilson, even more than Healey, wanted to keep open 
Britain's options east of Suez. What he wanted of me in London was not 
so much to argue the merits of staying east of Suez but to work on Labour 
backbenchers and those cabinet ministers who were against staying. 
I spoke to Labour backbenchers at the House of Commons later that 
afternoon. The Afro-Asian scene had changed rapidly, I said. Nehru was 
dead, Sukarno was discredited, and Mao was involved in the madness of 
the cultural revolution. Half a million American troops were in South 
Vietnam. The days of the white man's control of Asia had passed. Instead, 
some Asians insisted upon Asian solutions to Asian problems so that the 
big Asian countries could settle their problems with the smaller ones. The 
smaller ones had the right to ask their friends from the West to help 
redress the balance. 
I spent hours talking to Wilson's ministers. A scheduled half-hour 
meeting with Jim Callaghan, then chancellor of the exchequer (whom I 
had met several times over the previous 15 years), went on to one and a 
half hours. From time to time, whenever the division bells rang, he went 
out to the lobby to vote but asked me to stay. At the end, he said, "I was 
for naming a date by which Britain should be off but I will think over 
38 From Third World to First 
what you have told me. At the moment I have an open mind." He asked 
me to see Roy Jenkins, then home secretary. Roy Jenkins listened to me 
quietly and said that he would support naming no dates, but that Britain 
must be off the mainland by 1975. 
The minister most opposed to our position was Dick Crossman, then 
Leader of the House. For one hour, he hectored and berated me for mis­
leading and beguiling his colleagues into staying east of Suez. He set out 
to shock me by being deliberately rude. He wanted Britain to get out 
quickly, by 1970. He and his group of MPs wanted savings for more old­
age pensions, cheaper interest for home loans, and more votes. In his frus­
tration, he said, "You don't have to worry about me for I am a minority 
voice in the cabinet for the time being but I am winning, and more and 
more the Party is coming around to my point of view." Our high commis­
sioner, A. P. Rajah, who was present, thought Crossman was letting off 
steam because my arguments had strengthened the hand of those who 
wanted to stay. 
I believed we were all right this time, but there was no guarantee 
there would be no further knocks on the pound, which would lead to 
another fit of depression in the British cabinet, another defense review, 
and further watering down of their forces. This danger was one beyond 
the control even of the British government. The sad fact was the malaise 
of the British people, and the leadership was not inspiring their people. 
Both Labour ministers and backbenchers were despondent that they had 
had to do all the things they had said they did not want to do, including 
the stop-go economic policy for which they had criticized the Conser­
vative government. 
President Lyndon Johnson's papers showed that he had urged Wilson 
in Washington in June 1967 "not to take any steps which would be con­
trary to British or American interest and to the interest of the free nations 
of Asia." But Johnson did not push as hard as his aides had urged in their 
submissions to him before the meeting. Robert McNamara, Johnson's 
defense secretary, had written to Johnson as early as Decembe r 1965 that 
America placed a higher value on British presence and commitment in 
the Far East than in Europe. 
The British Defense White Paper published in July 1967 announced 
their intention to reduce forces in Southeast Asia by 50 percent by 
Britain Pulls Out 39 
1970-1971 and to withdraw completely by the mid-1970s. A dismayed 
Harold Holt wrote to Wilson and made his views known to me: "We see 
the U.K. government as having taken historic decisions to reduce its 
world role and contract, to a significant degree, from any kind of interna­
tional responsibility that Britain has carried for many, many years" and 
that the Australians must now "rethink our whole situation." 
Soon afterward, Wilson invited me to speak at his Labour Party 
annual conference in October 1967. I agreed, knowing he wanted me to 
talk his party into not opposing his staying on in Singapore. I was their 
main guest speaker, a fraternal delegate at their eve-of-conference rally on 
Sunday, 1 October, at Scarborough. I expressed the hope that Singapore's 
long association with the British over a period of 150 years could allow 
them to make the disengagement in a way "to give us the best chance of 
continuing security and stability," and that given a little time and no lit­
tle effort, we would live as well in the mid-1970s without British base 
expenditure as we were doing then. I knew the delegates would be pre­
occupied with Vietnam. Since I could not ignore the subject, I said, "I do 
not want to sound like a hawk or a dove. If I have to choose a metaphor 
from the aviary, I would like to think of the owl. Anyone looking at what 
is happening in Vietnam must have baleful eyes. It need never have been 
thus. And perhaps it was not the wisest place, nor the safest ground in 
Asia to have made a stand. But enormous sacrifices have already been 
expended and in blood, both Vietnamese and American." For that anti­
Vietnam audience this was the furthest I could go to hint that if the 
Americans pulled out, there would be severe repercussions for the rest of 
Southeast Asia. 
Barely six weeks later, without any warning, on Sunday, 18 Novembe r 
1967, Keng Swee received a message from Callaghan, as chancellor of the 
exchequer, similar to one he must have sent to all Commonwealth finance 
ministers, that the British were devaluing the pound sterling from 
US$2.80 to US$2.40. That meant we had lost 14.3 percent of the reserves 
we kept in London in sterling. Britain's currency came under selling pres­
sure soon after the Labour government took office in 1964 but we had not 
moved out our reserves. Their forces were defending us against Indonesian 
40 From Third World to First 
Confrontation, and we did not want to be blamed for precipitating a deval­
uation. Wilson, in a television broadcast that same Sunday evening, said, 
"We are now on our own; it means Britain first." This was ominous. But 
Healey was reassuring when he said in the House of Commons on 27 No­
vember, "I believe that the whole government share my view, that we 
must, above all, keep faith with our forces and with our allies in making 
these cuts. We can have no reversal of the July decisions .... That is why 
my Rt Hon Friend the chancellor [Callaghan} said last Monday that the 
reductions must be made within the framework of the defence policies 
announced last summer. Let me tell the Rt Hon Gentleman that these cuts 
mean no acceleration in the run-down or the redeployment of our forces." 
I wrote to thank Healey for his assurance. I was wrong: Healey could 
not speak for the government. Wilson, the prime minister, was out to save 
his government. He meant it when he said it was "Britain first." Wilson 
also said "no area of expenditure can be regarded as sacrosanct." I wrote to 
Wilson on 18 December to recount how the Singapore government had 
faithfully supported sterling and lost S$ l 5 7 million as a result of this 
devaluation (the Currency Board S$69 million, the Singapore government 
S$65 million, statutory boards S$23 million). My letter ended: "I would 
be loath to believe that temporary difficulties could disrupt the trust and 
confidence we have in each other's good intentions, goodwill and good 
faith. I shall stand by my statement at Scarborough and on our part we 
shall see that the last of the British forces will be given a ceremonial send­
off when they leave their bases in the mid-70s." 
This was a forlorn hope. In the first major crisis of his government, 
Wilson had no time to save friends and allies, however faithful. Instead of 
replying, he sent George Thomson, the Commonwealth relations secretary, 
to see me on 9 January 1968. Thomson was apologetic and defensive. 
Devaluation, he said, had given the British government a chance once and 
for all to put the economy right. The defense cuts would mean a fundamen­
tal change in the historic role of Britain and its long-term defense structure. 
The British would remain in Europe, though their capability could be used 
to help allies outside Europe. I asked about Healey's statement about an 
amphibious capability in Singapore. That was to be scrapped. No naval 
forces would be stationed in Southeast Asia after 1971. Asked how firm 
the decision to pull out by 1971 was, Thomson said it was very firm but 
Britain Pulls Out 41 
they would take into account the views of their Commonwealth partners. 
Thomson was gentle and friendly in his demeanor. His sympathies were 
with us. It was an unpleasant task Wilson had given him. To soften the 
blow, Wilson invited me for discussions at Chequers, the official country 
home of the prime minister. 
In my frustration and anger at this total disregard for undertakings 
given solemnly, I said that we too could put Singapore's interests first and 
foremost and protect our sterling balances by moving them out of London. 
Nevertheless, I decided to go to London and see Wilson at Chequers. 
Wilson changed the venue from Chequers to 10 Downing Street on 
a Sunday. When I arrived at 5:30 P.M., his three senior ministers were 
present: Denis Healey (defense), George Brown (foreign affairs), and 
George Thomson (Commonwealth relations). Wilson held out some hope 
by saying that the cabinet had agreed not to make a final decision until I 
had met him. 
I said any precipitate announcement that all British troops would be 
off the mainland of Asia by 1971 would shake the confidence of investors, 
especially those from Hong Kong, and make them go further afield. To 
restore confidence, Singapore would have to go for massive arms expendi­
ture to make its defense credible. I argued that the British armed services 
owned valuable real estate in Singapore, homes and barracks worth over 
£5 5 million. If the rundown took place over three years, they would not 
fetch half this price on the open market. 
Wilson reiterated what Healey had told me a year earlier in Singapore, 
that the decision to withdraw was made on economic grounds and could 
not be altered. The decision on timing, March 1971, was fairly unanimous 
and his ministers present represented the cabinet view. He was anxious to 
discuss aid to give real economic relief to Singapore. I replied that security 
was my main concern, for without it there would be no investments, which 
we needed much more than aid. 
Wilson left the arguments for early withdrawal to Healey while he sat 
back, sucked at his pipe and looked on sympathetic ally. From Wilson's 
body language, I knew it would be impossible to keep him to his original 
undertaking to stay till the mid-l 970s. 
The British ministers sympathized with my plight. The most sup­
portive was George Brown. Remembering his strong views when we met 
42 From Third World to First 
in Stockholm in 1966, that British forces should be out of Singapore, I 
was surprised when he asked how much time I needed. I named 31 March 
197 3. Years later he told me that U.S. President Johnson had persuaded 
him that while the Vietnam War continued, America could not replace 
British forces in the Arabian Gulf and Singapore, and that the British 
contribution was politically invaluable. 
At about 7:00 P.M., Roy Jenkins, who had replaced Callaghan as 
chancellor of the exchequer, joined us. He pitched in on a related subject, 
that Singapore's economic position stood out from those of other coun­
tries in the region. We were doing well. The position in Britain was quite 
serious. He compared British and Singapore reserves to show that, per 
capita, the figure for Britain was smaller than Singapore's. He criticized 
the Singapore government for investing its budgetary surplus elsewhere 
without informing the British government. He was on the offensive. We 
had never taken any of our reserves out of sterling. But we had not given 
any undertaking to put our budgetary surpluses into sterling. He had 
scored a point, that we were not as helpful as we could have been and 
could not expect special consideration now. 
We talked through dinner, repeating arguments again and again as 
we drank liberal glasses of claret-Jenkins's favorite wine. We finished at 
10:50 P.M. after five and a half hours. Wilson, summing up, said the 
British government accepted the need to help maintain confidence in 
Singapore. But he emphasized that there could be no permanent security 
for Singapore except in the framework of a wider regional defense agree­
ment with other Commonwealth countries concerned. It was inadvisable 
for Singapore to make hasty decisions on the purchase of military equip­
ment before the possibility of such an arrangement had been explored in 
greater detail. His government would do all they reasonably could, con­
sistent with their overriding aim (total withdrawal by 1971), to help 
Singapore maintain security and hoped that the Singapore government 
would take full account of British advice. 
The next day, Monday, 15 January 1968, in the House of Commons, 
Healey announced that British forces east of Suez would withdraw in 
1971, but he shifted the actual date for final withdrawal from March to 
December 1971. This difference of nine months was significant because 
a general election would have to be held before December 1971. In 
Britain Pulls Out 43 
other words, the decision on the final date of withdrawal could either be 
confirmed by a new Labour government or postponed by a Conservative 
government. I had to be satisfied with this concession. Defense correspon­
dents reporting Healey's speech noted that he had left this opening. My 
trip to London had not been altogether in vain. 
But Wilson knew this was the end of an era. In the debate he quoted 
from Kipling's "Recessional ": 
Far-called our navies melt away 
On dune and headland sinks the fire 
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday 
Is one with Nineveh and Tyre. 
During those five days in London in January 1968 I worked hard 
to prolong the British presence. Besides discussions with Wilson, I took 
my case to Conservative Party leaders, primarily Ted Heath, Reginald 
Maudling, and lain Macleod. They were most sympathetic and support­
ive; if they were the government, they would have wished to stay longer 
without naming a withdrawal date. That made a difference to the actual 
final outcome. British television and press gave me extensive coverage. I 
was able to put across a reasoned, not an angry, case. I tugged at the heart­
strings of the British people, that our long and fruitful association should 
not end in an unseemly way which would damage Singapore's future. I 
had put on the best face possible. But Keng Swee, who flew back to 
Singapore ahead of me, voiced his frustrations to the press at Singapore 
airport: "The Labour Party has gone back on its word-a disgraceful 
breach of an undertaking given to us." 
I saw no point in venting my spleen. My other colleagues, including 
Raja, Chin Chye, and Sui Sen, were deeply disappointed and apprehensive 
of the implications for our security and economy. But they did not berate 
the British. Angry words would only annoy British ministers and ruffle 
British service commanders in Singapore who, after all, were loyal 
Britishers. I needed goodwill and cooperation from the British to execute 
the withdrawal with the minimum of friction and the maximum of good­
will, and not have military workshops stripped bare as had happened in 
Guinea (West Africa) when the French left in the 1960s. 
44 From Third World to First 
This sudden turn of events added to the pressure on us. Our economic 
problems would mount, as would unemployment. Our defense problems 
had widened with the need for an air force. How were we to build up an 
air force from scratch and have a squadron of fighter aircraft operational 
by the end of 1971 ? When we saw Healey a second time about buying a 
squadron of Hawker Hunters, he readily agreed. He would also help build 
up our capability to operate them, a total change from his attitude in 
October 1966, less than two years earlier, when he had wagged his finger 
at us for harboring "mischievous " thoughts. 
The British media were sympathetic but on the whole pessimistic 
about Singapore's future. Singapore would lose about 20 percent of its 
GDP with the end of British military spending, and without British mil­
itary protection, they saw the future as precarious. The chairman of the 
Daily Mirror Group, Cecil King, was at my press conference on my return 
to Singapore from London in January. He told my press secretary, Alex 
Josey, that his heart went out to me but the situation was hopeless. With 
high unemployment and no security after the withdrawal of the British, 
the economy must decline. King was not alone in holding such a pes­
simistic view of Singapore's prospects. 
To fill the vacuum that followed the ending of the Anglo-Malayan 
Defense Agreement (AMDA), the British had proposed a Five-Power 
Defense Arrangement (FPDA) that would be consultative, not a binding 
defense obligation. I knew the Australians were fearful that the 
Indonesians would have the wrong impression, that the five powers-the 
United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, and Singapore­
were ganging up against Indonesia. In February 1968, Paul Hasluck, 
Australia's external affairs minister, when in Singapore, had told me that 
Australia would maintain its force levels till the end of 1971, after which 
his government was uncertain. In other words, the Australian forces could 
leave together with the British. I stressed to him that it was necessary to 
make clear to everyone that it was not the intention of the Western allies 
to leave a vacuum in the area after 1971, which could be filled by either 
Russia or China or anybody else. He stressed that Malaysia-Sing apore 
Britain Pulls Out 45 
cooperation was fundamental to Australian defense planning. I assured 
him that we regarded any attack on Malaysia as a threat to Singapore, but 
I encouraged him to make it clear to the Malaysians that any bilateral 
agreement with Australia that excluded Singapore was simply not on. I 
described how on my trip to Melbourne for Prime Minister Harold Holt's 
memorial service in December 1967, Razak was on the same aircraft but 
virtually ignored me. But after McEwen, the Australian deputy prime 
minister who was acting as prime minister before John Gorton took over, 
had rebuffed him in blunt terms when he tried for a bilateral agreement 
between Australia and Malaysia, Razak was all reasonableness and accom­
modation as he spent three hours in the aircraft with me discussin g 
Malaysia's defense and security. Singapore-Malaysia bilateral relations on 
defense improved considerably after this. 
Indeed, Razak told Kim San and Keng Swee in March 1968 that the 
security of both countries was inseparable, that Malaysia could not afford 
heavy military expenditure and Singapore, being a small island and very 
vulnerable to sneak attacks, should concentrate on its air defense capabil­
ity while Malaysia with its long coastline would concentrate on its navy. 
This way we would complement each other. "As two separate territories, 
we talk to one another as equals. Wherever we can agree, we work 
together. If we cannot agree, well, we wait a while." 
Shortly after the race riots in Kuala Lumpur in May 1969, followed 
by the suspension of the Malaysian Parliament, Razak had to represent 
Malaysia in Canberra at a meeting of prime ministers of the five powers, 
to discuss defense arrangements after the British pullout in 1971. Before 
the conference started, the Australian permanent secretary of defense told 
us that his prime minister, John Gorton, would not be attending the con­
ference. In a private discussion, the permanent secretary in their external 
affairs department said Gorton doubted the Malaysian government's abil­
ity to contain the situation and believed further racial trouble would 
break out and Singapore would be "sucked into" the conflict. Gorton had 
totally lost confidence in Malaysia. He did not want to commit Australia 
to any defense arrangement with Malaysia. The Australians were already 
most unhappy that the British were leaving the region and they did not 
want to be saddled with responsibility for the defense of Malaysia and 
46 From Third World to First 
Singapore. Gorton foresaw disaster and was fearful of the electorate's reac­
tion to any new commitments Australia might make for the defense of 
Malaysia and Singapore. 
At the last moment, however, he came to open the conference but left 
immediately after his speech. He stressed the need for racial harmony in 
the area and for a categorical assurance from Malaysia and Singapore that 
their defense was "indivisible." Razak and his Malaysian officials looked 
extremely depressed. 
That night I talked to Razak in his hotel room. I decided to set aside 
my reservations and support his bid that, after 1971, the commander for 
the Five-Power Defense Arrangement should be responsible to represen­
tatives of the five powers and not just to Singapore and Malaysia as 
Australia proposed. This cheered Razak. Toward the end of the conference 
Gordon Freeth, the Australian external affairs minister, clarified that if 
Malaysia were attacked, Australian troops could be deployed in either 
East or West Malaysia. 
The Conservatives in Britain had been aghast at withdrawing their 
forces east of Suez. In January 1970, Edward Heath, as Leader of the Oppo­
sition, visited Singapore. I arranged for him to have discussions with all 
key ministers to get a comprehensive view of our economic development, 
the progress in our defense buildup and an overview of the political and 
social situation. I arranged for the RAF to give him a bird's-eye view of 
the island from a helicopter. He was impressed and told the press he 
would "halt" Labour's policy of withdrawal from east of Suez. He said, 
"There won't be any question of British forces having been withdrawn 
and British forces coming back. It will be a question that British forces 
are still here and we as a Conservative government will halt the with­
drawal." He added he was "immensely impressed with the really remark­
able achievements which had been brought to the island .... The basis for 
all of this is confidence in the future and peace and stability in the whole 
area." I hoped the British service commanders would take note and not be 
too hurried in their withdrawal. 
Five months later, in June 1970, the Conservative Party won the gen­
eral election and Edward Heath became prime minister. His defense min­
ister, Peter Carrington, visited Singapore that same month to announce 
that withdrawal would proceed as planned, but that Britain would retain 
Britain Pulls Out 47 
some of its forces in Singapore on an equal basis with the Australians and 
New Zealanders. Privately, Carrington told me that Britain would not 
leave behind any fighter or transport squadrons. There would be only four 
Nimrod surveillance aircraft, a flight of Whirlwind helicopters, and a 
battalion would be stationed at Nee Soon, one of their camps. There 
would be five frigates/destroyers stationed throughout east of Suez and 
the Anglo-Malayan Defense Agreement would be replaced by a "political 
commitment of a consultative nature." The British made it clear they 
wanted to participate, not as the leader, but as a partner "on an equal 
basis" in the Five-Power Defense Arrangement being planned. 
In mid-April 1971, the five prime ministers met in London to final­
ize the political arrangements to replace AMOA. The operative words 
read, "In the event of any form of armed attack externally organised or 
supported, or the threat of such attack against Malaysia or Singapore, the 
governments would immediately consult together for the purpose of 
deciding what measure should be taken jointly or separately in relation to 
such attack or threat." To "immediately consult" was better than not con­
sulting. 
On 1 September 1971, the integrated air defense system was estab­
lished. On 31 October 1971, the AMOA was replaced by the FPDA. The 
old era of underwritten security had ended. From now on we had to be 
responsible for our own security. 
But security was not our only concern. We had to make a living, to 
persuade investors to put their money into manufacturing plants and 
other businesses in Singapore. We had to learn to survive, without the 
British military umbrella and without a hinterland. 
4. Surviving Without a Hinterland 
In 1965, a few months after independence, an economic planner whom 
the Indian government had seconded to us presented me with a thick vol­
ume of his report. I scanned the summary to confirm that his plans were 
based on a common market with Malaysia. I thanked him, and never read 
it again. He did not understand that if Malaysia was not willing to have a 
common market while Singapore was a part of it, it was hardly likely to 
agree now we were independent. We were stripped of our role as the 
administrative, commercial, and military hub of the British Empire in 
Southeast Asia. Unless we could find and attach ourselves to a new hinter­
land, the future was bleak. 
A few weeks earlier, I had met Dr. Albert Winsemius, our Dutch eco­
nomic adviser. He painted a grim but not hopeless picture. Because of 
Confrontation by Indonesia, unemployment had risen. If we continued 
with no common market with Malaysia and no trade with Indonesia, by 
the end of 1966 unemployment would exceed 14 percent. This would 
mean social unrest. "Singapore is walking on a razor's edge," he said. He 
recommended a common market agreement with Malaysia (which was a 
nonstarter) and a resumption of barter trade with Indonesia. He also 
advised that we seek more favorable entry for Singapore-manufactured 
goods into the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and New 
Zealand. 
Winsemius first came to Singapore in 1960 when he led a United 
Nations Developme nt Program (UNDP) mission to advise us on industri-
50 From Third World to First 
alization. I remember his first report to me in 1961 when he laid two pre­
conditions for Singapore's success: first, to eliminate the communists who 
made any economic progress impossible; second, not to remove the statue 
of Stamford Raffles. To tell me in 1961, when the communist united 
front was at the height of its power and pulverizing the PAP government 
day after day, that I should eliminate the communists left me speechless 
as I laughed at the absurdity of his simple solution. To keep Raffles' 
statue was easy. My colleagues and I had no desire to rewrite the past and 
perpetuate ourselves by renaming streets or buildings or putting our faces 
on postage stamps or currency notes. Winsemius said we would need 
large-scale technical, managerial, entrepreneurial, and marketing know­
how from America and Europe. Investors wanted to see what a new social­
ist government in Singapore was going to do to the statue of Raffles. 
Letting it remain would be a symbol of public acceptance of the British 
heritage and could have a positive effect. I had not looked at it that way, 
but was quite happy to leave this monument because he was the founder 
of modern Singapore. If Raffles had not come here in 1819 to establish a 
trading post, my great grandfather would not have migrated to Singapore 
from Dapu county in Guangdong province, southeast China. The British 
created an emporium that offered him, and many thousands like him, the 
opportunity to make a better living than in their homeland which was 
going through turmoil and chaos as the Qing dynasty declined and disin­
tegrated. 
Now, in 1965, we too faced a future so bleak that I asked Kim San, 
then minister of finance, to send a trade delegation from our four cham­
bers of commerce and the manufacturers' association to Africa on "the off­
chance of picking up some business." The delegation went to East and 
West African countries, but little trade followed. 
After grappling with the problem of unemployment for years since we 
first took office in 1959, all of us in the cabinet knew that the only way to 
survive was to industrialize. We had reached the limits of our entrepot 
trade. The outlook was a further decline. Confrontation from Indonesia 
was still on and the Malaysians were determined to bypass Singapore. We 
cast around for solutions and were willing to try any practical idea that 
could create jobs and enable us to pay our way. One of our soft drink man­
ufacturers suggested to me that we promote tourism; it was labor-
Surviving Without a Hinterland 51 
intensive, needing cooks, maids, waiters, laundrymen, drycleaners, tour 
guides, drivers, and makers of souvenir handicraft. Best of all, it required 
little capital. We formed the Singapore Tourist Promotion Board and 
appointed our film magnate, Runme Shaw of Shaw Brothers, as chairman. 
He was the right man for the job. He was in the film and entertainment 
industry and knew all about the packaging and selling of sights and 
sounds, and how to keep visitors amused while in a strange country. He 
had a logo designed, the "merlion, " a lion with a mermaid's tail. I 
launched the logo erected in concrete at the mouth of the Singapore River. 
I did little else for the tourist industry except to speak at the occasional 
convention of visiting professionals or businesspeople. To my relief it did 
create many jobs and put coins into many empty pockets. It reduced but 
did not solve the unemployment problem. 
For that, we concentrated on getting factories started. Despite our 
small domestic market of 2 million, we protected locally assembled cars, 
refrigerators, air conditioners, radios, television sets, and tape-recorders, 
in the hope that they would later be partly manufactured locally. We 
encouraged our own businesspeople who set up small factories to manu­
facture vegetable oils, cosmetics, mosquito coils, hair cream, joss paper, 
and even mothballs! And we were able to attract Hong Kong and 
Taiwanese investors to build factories for toys, textiles, and garments. 
It was an unpromising start. The Jurong industrial estate in the west 
of Singapore was empty in spite of the vast sums we had spent on infra­
structure. We had more than our share of failures. Short of water and too 
small to tolerate heavy pollution of coastal waters, the Economic Develop­
ment Board (EDB) nevertheless went into a joint venture to recycle paper 
products, with a businessman who had no manufacturing experience. It 
also invested in ceramics when we did not have the technical know-how. 
Both ventures failed. We had a joint venture with IHI (Ishikawajima­
Harima Heavy Industries) in Jurong Shipyard for shipbuilding and ship 
repairing and started to build 14,000-dwt (dead-weight tons) Freedom­
type vessels and later 90,000-dwt tankers. But Singapore produced nei­
ther steel plates nor engines and had to import them from Japan. After 16 
Freedom-type vessels and three tankers, we stopped building ships, 
except for small vessels of 10,000 dwt. It was not profitable, unlike ship 
repairing for which the labor content was high. 
52 From Third World to First 
In the early years any factory was welcome. For example, when I was 
in London in January 1968 to discuss the British withdrawal, Marcus 
Sieff, the chairman of Marks & Spencer's, saw me at my London hotel. He 
had seen me on BBC television. He suggested that as Chinese had nimble 
fingers, Singapore could go into making fishhooks and lures for trout 
fishing. This was high-value work because the feathers had to be skillfully 
attached to the hooks. There were other such products that did not 
require much capital equipment but created many jobs. His retail net­
work could help market the goods. I must have looked forlorn on televi­
sion for him to have taken the time to see me. I thanked him but nothing 
came of it. Not long after, a Norwegian manufacturer of fishhooks, 
Mustad, set up a factory in Singapore, employing several hundred workers 
to make millions of fishhooks of all shapes and sizes, though not with 
feathers for trout fishing. 
The loss of British military expenditure between 1968 and 1971 was a 
blow to our economy. It was some 20 percent of our GDP, providing over 
30,000 jobs in direct employment and another 40,000 in support ser­
vices. I was determined that our attitude to British aid, indeed any aid, 
should be the opposite of Malta's. When I visited Malta in 1967 to see 
how it had sorted out its problems after the rundown of the British forces, 
I was astounded. The Suez Canal had been closed as a result of the Arab­
Israeli Six-Day War three months earlier, in June. Ships were no longer 
going through the Canal, hence the dockyard in Malta was closed, but 
dockworkers on full pay were playing water polo in the dry dock which 
they had filled with water! I was shaken by their aid dependency, banking 
on continuing charity from the British. The British had given fairly gen­
erous redundancy payments, including five weeks' salary for each year of 
service, and had also covered the cost of three months' retraining in 
Maltese government institutions. This nurtured a sense of dependency, 
not a spirit of self-reliance. 
Healey in 1967 had promised "significant aid" to offset the loss from 
the rundown of British forces. I was convinced our people must never 
have an aid-dependent mentality. If we were to succeed we had to depend 
on ourselves. Even before talks on British aid commenced, I had said in 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 53 
Parliament on 9 September 1967, "There was a thriving Singapore before 
the bases were built and manned. If we set about it intelligentl y and in 
good heart, there will be a bigger and economically more self-reliant 
Singapore after the bases have been run down." My attitude was that we 
wanted the British to give us the earliest notice of those facilities, like the 
naval dockyard, they would find redundant and hand them over to civil­
ian management while still in military use. Next, assistance should pro­
vide Singapore with jobs through industries and not make us dependent 
on perpetual injections of aid. I warned our workers, "The world does not 
owe us a living. We cannot live by the begging bowl." 
Hon Sui Sen, our most capable permanent secretary, drew up a list of 
British assets that could be converted to civilian use. The British outlined 
their approach to the 15,000 acres of real estate they occupied, 11 percent 
of Singapore 's total area. Land to be used for economic or defense purposes 
would be made available without charge. The Singapore government was 
to help sell the remaining land on the open market. But in January 1968, 
before the negotiations were concluded, the British announced their total 
withdrawal by 1971. 
On my return to Singapore that January, I said in a broadcast, "If we 
were a soft society then we would already have perished. A soft people 
will vote for those who promised a soft way out, when in truth there is 
none. There is nothing Singapore gets for free, even our water we pay 
for .... There will be a throbbing and humming industrial, commercial 
and communication centre long after the British have gone." I felt 
strongly that the people's morale and confidence would be decisive in the 
coming battle for Singapore's survival. 
That February, we formed the Bases Economic Conversion Depart­
ment with Sui Sen in charge. I placed it under my portfolio in the Prime 
Minister's Office to give Sui Sen more clout when dealing with other 
ministries. His job was to retrain and redeploy redundant workers, take 
possession of land and other assets the British were vacating, put them to 
the best use, and negotiate mitigatory aid. 
It was important we did not generate rancor and friction over the 
handover of properties or the provision of aid. To do so would undermine 
confidence, and whatever aid we might get could never make up for the 
loss of confidence if relations with the British soured. Moreover, I still 
54 From Third World to First 
hoped for some residual presence of British, Australian, and New Zealand 
forces after 1971. I told the newly arrived British high commissioner, Sir 
Arthur de la Mare, in February 1968 that Singapore would accept what­
ever his government gave, but would not press chem. I asked chat his gov­
ernment leave whatever it had no further use for instead of destroying it 
as was the practice. This would create goodwill and sustain pro-British 
sentiments in Singapore. 
By March 1968 the discussions concluded with a £50 million aid 
package to be spent on British goods and services. Of chis, 25 percent 
were grants, 75 percent loans. We spent half on development projects and 
half on British defense equipment. The British agreed to hand over the 
naval dockyard at Sembawang including two valuable floating docks the 
Royal Navy could easily have towed away, provided the Singapore gov­
ernment appointed Swan & Hunter as managing agents under a five-year 
contract. I had met Sir John Hunter when I was in London in June 1967, 
and again in October when I visited his dockyards on Tyneside after the 
Labour Party conference in Scarborough. The Americans, who were anx­
ious to keep the naval dockyard viable, sent army and navy teams in 
January and February to inspect the facilities. In April 1968 Sui Sen told 
me the United States would test-use Sembawang's ship-repair facilities 
from April co June 1968 and provide S$4 to 5 million of business. That 
was most encouraging. 
This conversion of the naval dockyard to civilian use was successful. 
Swan & Hunter prospered both at Keppel, our civilian dockyard, and 
at Sembawang. When two 5-year contracts ended in 1978, one of their 
top managers, Neville Watson, stayed on with Sembawang Shipyard 
Limited, the company we had formed co run the dockyard. Eventually he 
became its chief executive. The company prospered and grew to become 
SembCorp Industries, a conglomerate listed on the Stock Exchange of 
Singapore. 
Blakang Mati (behind death), an island off Singapore's harbor housing 
a British Gurkha battalion, became "Sentosa" (tranquillity), a tourist 
resort. Dr. Winsemius got me to stop it from becoming a military train­
ing area, a casino, or an oil refinery, proposals put up by various miniseries 
to the Bases Economic Conversion unit under Sui Sen. I did not need per­
suading to veto these proposals. Fort Canning, with all its tunnels and 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 55 
bunkers, the British Army headquarters before the Japanese capture of 
Singapore, has also been preserved, the buildings turned into a clubhouse 
for leisure and recreation . Seletar military airfield was converted to civil­
ian use for small cargo planes and small commercial aircraft. The RAF 
Changi air base has been expanded by land reclamation and developed 
into Changi International Airport with two runways. The Pasir Panjang 
military complex is now the National University of Singapore campus at 
Kent Ridge with 26,000 students. 
In his quiet, methodical way Sui Sen converted the real estate to eco­
nomic use, and his EDB staff attracted investors from around the world to 
set up industries on former British army land. It was our good fortune 
that the real estate handover started in 1968 and was completed by 1971, 
before the oil crisis in 1973. A buoyant world economy, with world trade 
expanding at about 8 to 10 percent per annum, made it easier to convert 
them to civilian use. 
The withdrawal was carried out with goodwill on both sides. The 
30,000 retrenched workers were absorbed by industries we attracted from 
abroad. When the withdrawal was completed in 1971, our people were 
quietly confident. There was no unemployment, and no land or building 
was left idle or derelict. The single British battalion with a squadron of 
helicopters, together with the Australian and New Zealand battalions 
that formed the FPDA, contributed to stability and security. 
After I had settled policies to counter the loss of British military spend­
ing, in the autumn of 1968, I took a short sabbatical at Harvard. I had 
been in office for nine years and needed to recharge my batteries, get some 
fresh ideas and reflect on the future. The Kennedy School of Government 
made me an honorary fellow and arranged breakfasts, lunches, dinners, and 
seminars for me to meet a host of distinguished scholars. During the 
exchanges, they sparked off many useful and interesting ideas. I learned 
much about American society and economy by reading and talking to 
Harvard Business School professors such as Professor Ray Vernon. Vernon 
gave me a valuable lesson on the ever-changing nature of technology, 
industry, and markets, and how costs, especially wages in labor-intensive 
industries, determined profits. That was how Hong Kong entrepreneurs 
56 From Third World to First 
were able co build up such a successful textile and garments industry. They 
had been nimble, changing their produce lines, patterns, and designs with 
changing fashions. It was a never-ending competition against ocher equally 
agile and lower-cost producers in Taiwan and South Korea. And their sales 
promoters were frequently flying to consult their buyers in New York and 
ocher big cities. He dispelled my previous belief chat industries changed 
gradually and seldom moved from an advanced country to a less-developed 
one. Reliable and cheap air and sea transport made it possible co move 
industries into new countries, provided their people were disciplined and 
trained co work the machines, and there was a stable and efficient govern­
ment co facilitate the process for foreign entrepreneurs. 
On my first official visit to America in October 1967, I recounted co 
50 businesspeople at a luncheon in Chicago how Singapore had grown 
from a village of 120 fishermen in 1819 co become a metropolis of 2 mil­
lion. This was because its philosophy was co provide goods and services 
"cheaper and better than anyone else, or perish." They responded well 
because I was not putting my hand out for aid, which they had come co 
expect of leaders from newly independent countries. I noted their favor­
able reaction co my "no begging bowl" approach. 
In November 1968, I went to New York to address some 800 top 
decisionmakers at the Economic Club of New York. My hard-headed and 
realistic analysis of Singapore 's problems and the dangers in the region, 
especially the war in Vietnam, was well received. I cook pains co end on a 
sober but upbeat note, painting a silver lining on somber clouds. I 
answered their difficult questions frankly and directly. Several of the exec­
utives wrote to congratulate me, and after that night Chan Chin Bock, 
our EDB chief in New York, found it much easier co gee access to cop 
American executives. Thereafter, every time I visited America, he would 
arrange for me co meet 20 to 50 executives. The usual format was drinks 
before lunch or dinner, conversation at the main table with the important 
CEOs, then a 20-minute speech followed by questions and answers. Chin 
Bock explained that most American CEOs had no time to visit Singapore, 
but they wanted co see and assess the man in charge before they set up a 
factory there. My meetings were productive because Winsemius had told 
me how their minds worked; his son was working for a large American 
business consultancy firm and knew exactly how Americans weighed 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 57 
business risks. They looked for political, economic, and financial stability 
and sound labor relations to make sure that there would be no disruption 
in production that supplied their customers and subsidiaries around the 
world. 
That December, I met another group of American executives in the 
Far East American Council. Originally only 100 were to attend. After 
that Economic Club dinner, word got around that I was worth listening 
to, and the numbers swelled to 200. In a note to the cabinet I grumbled, 
"Eating and talking through the meal while conserving energy and not 
letting myself go and drink in case I lose my sharp cutting edge is quite a 
strain. It is part of the price to promote American investments. " 
After several years of disheartening trial and error, we concluded that 
Singapore's best hope lay with the American multinational corporations 
(MNCs). When the Taiwanese and Hong Kong entrepreneurs came in the 
1960s, they brought low technology such as textile and toy manufac­
turing, labor-intensive but not large-scale. American MNCs brought 
higher technology in large-scale operations, creating many jobs. They had 
weight and confidence. They believed that their government was going to 
stay in Southeast Asia and their businesses were safe from confiscation or 
war loss. 
I gradually crystallized my thoughts and settled on a two-pronged 
strategy to overcome our disadvantages. The first was to leapfrog the 
region, as the Israelis had done. This idea sprang from a discussion I had 
with a UNDP expert who visited Singapore in 1962. In 1964, while on a 
tour of Africa, I met him again in Malawi. He described to me how the 
Israelis, faced with a more hostile environment than ours, had found a 
way around their difficulties by leaping over their Arab neighbors who 
boycotted them, to trade with Europe and America. Since our neighbors 
were out to reduce their ties with us, we had to link up with the devel­
oped world-America, Europe, and Japan-and attract their manufactur­
ers to produce in Singapore and export their products to the developed 
countries . 
The accepted wisdom of development economists at the time was that 
MNCs were exploiters of cheap land, labor, and raw materials. This 
"dependency school" of economists argued that MNCs continued the 
colonial pattern of exploitation that left the developing countries selling 
58 From Third World to First 
raw materials to and buying consumer goods from the advanced coun­
tries. MNCs controlled technology and consumer preferences and formed 
alliances with their host governments to exploit the people and keep 
them down. Third World leaders believed this theory of neocolonialist 
exploitation, but Keng Swee and I were not impressed. We had a real-life 
problem to solve and could not afford to be conscribed by any theory or 
dogma. Anyway, Singapore had no natural resources for MNCs to exploit. 
All it had were hard-working people, good basic infrastructure, and a 
government that was determined to be honest and competent. Our duty 
was to create a livelihood for 2 million Singaporeans. If MNCs could give 
our workers employment and teach them technical and engineering skills 
and management know-how, we should bring in the MNCs. 
The second part of my strategy was to create a First World oasis in a 
Third World region. This was something Israel could not do because it 
was at war with its neighbors. If Singapore could establish First World 
standards in public and personal security, health, education, telecommu­
nications, transportation, and services, it would become a base camp for 
entrepreneurs, engineers, managers, and other professionals who had busi­
ness to do in the region. This meant we had to train our people and equip 
them to provide First World standards of service. I believed this was pos­
sible, that we could reeducate and reorientate our people with the help of 
schools, trade unions, community centers, and social organizations. If the 
communists in China could eradicate all flies and sparrows, surely we 
could get our people to change their Third World habits. 
We had one simple guiding principle for survival, that Singapore had 
to be more rugged, better organized, and more efficient than others in the 
region. If we were only as good as our neighbors, there was no reason for 
businesses to be based here. We had to make it possible for investors to 
operate successfully and profitably in Singapore despite our lack of a 
domestic market and natural resources . 
We had established the Economic Development Board by statute in 
August 1961. Winsemius had recommended a one-stop agency so that an 
investor need not deal with a large number of departments and ministries. 
This agency would sort out all an investor's requirements whether relat-
Surviving Without a Hinterland 59 
ing to land, power, water, or environmental and work safety. For the first 
few months, the EDB had experts from the UNDP and the International 
Labour Office to help it. The EDB's main efforts were in investment pro­
motion, concentrating on the four industries Winsemius had named in 
his report-ship breaking and repair, metal engineering, chemicals, and 
electrical equipment and appliances. 
Hon Sui Sen was picked by Keng Swee as the first chairman of the 
EDB and given the choice of the brightest and best of our scholars who 
had returned from universities in Britain, Canada, Australia, and New 
Zealand. These young men were inspired by Sui Sen, a quiet, outstanding 
administrator with an amazing ability to get the best out of those who 
worked for him. He shaped the culture of the EDB-the enthusiasm, the 
unflagging spirit, the ingenious ways they got around obstacles-to pro­
mote investments and create jobs. He made the EDB so successful and 
large that he had to break off different components of the organization, 
turning the industrial estates section into the Jurong Town Corporation 
and the development finance section into the Development Bank of 
Singapore (DBS). Both became leaders in their own fields. DBS helped 
finance our entrepreneurs who needed venture capital because our estab­
lished banks had no experience outside trade financing and were too con­
servative and reluctant to lend to would-be manufacturers. 
It was hard legwork for our young EDB officers to interest foreign 
investors in the opportunities in Singapore, to persuade them to send mis­
sions here to see for themselves. When Chin Bock first began visiting cor­
porate offices, the CEOs did not even know where Singapore was. He had 
to point it out on their globes, a little dot at the tip of the Malay penin­
sula in Southeast Asia. EDB officers would sometimes call on 40 to 50 
companies before getting one to visit Singapore. They worked with inex­
haustible energy because they felt the survival of Singapore depended 
upon them. Ngiam Tong Dow, a young EDB director, later permanent 
secretary of the ministry of trade and industry, remembered what Keng 
Swee told him, that every time he drove by a school and saw hundreds of 
children streaming out, he felt downhearted, wondering how to find jobs 
for them when they left school. 
The EDB officers had imbibed the values and attitudes of the minis­
ters, a willingness to learn from others and a readiness to accept assistance 
60 From Third World to First 
from any quarter. They were helped by their English-language education. 
We had inherited the English language from the British and had adopted 
it as our common working language. From the able team in the EDB, I 
later found three cabinet ministers, S. Dhanabalan , Lee Yock Suan, and 
Yeo Cheow Tong. Several EDB officers, including Joe Pillay and Ngiam 
Tong Dow, became outstanding permanent secretaries. In addition Pillay 
was chairman of Singapore Airlines where his financial and business skills 
made it the most profitable airline in Asia, while Ngiam became chair­
man of the Development Bank of Singapore. 
Winsemius played a crucial role as economic adviser, serving for 23 years 
until 1984. He visited Singapore twice a year, each time for about three 
weeks. We paid for his air tickets and hotel bills in Singapore but for 
nothing else. To keep him up to date, Ngiam, his EDB liaison officer, sent 
him regular reports and daily copies of the Straits Times. His practice was 
to spend his first week in Singapore in discussions with our officials, the 
next with executives of MNCs and some Singapore companies, and also 
with NTUC (National Trades Union Congress) leaders. He would submit 
his report and recommendations to the minister of finance and to me. 
Then I would have a working lunch with him alone. 
The top executives of the MN Cs soon appreciated the value of his role 
and spoke freely to him of their problems : overregulation by the govern­
ment, the rising value of the Singapore dollar, too much job-hopping, too 
restrictive a policy on employing foreign workers, and so on. Winsemius 
had a pragmatic, hands-on approach, a good head for figures, and a knack 
for getting to grips with the basic issues, ignoring the mass of details. 
Most of all he was wise and canny. I learned much from him especially 
about how European and American CEOs think and operate. 
In between his visits to Singapore, he would meet me whenever my 
work took me to London, Paris, Brussels, or Amsterdam. He had to 
endure one hardship: He was a chain-smoker and I was allergic to smoke, 
so for him our working meals were a real deprivation. Whenever possible, 
the lunch or dinner would be alfresco, to let him smoke. He spoke 
English fluently if ungrammatically and with a heavy Dutch accent. He 
had a deep, guttural voice, a leathery face with deeply lined forehead and 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 61 
cheeks, horn-rimmed glasses, and hair combed straight back. He once 
told me he could not explain why he felt a great affinity with Sui Sen 
and me and could only conclude that there was a "congruence of the 
Calvinistic and Confucian philosoph y oflife." Whatever the reason, it was 
Singapore 's good fortune that he enjoyed working with us. 
The government played a key role in attracting foreign investments; we 
built the infrastructure and provided well-planned industrial estates, 
equity participation in industries, fiscal incentives , and export promotion. 
Most important, we established good labor relations and sound macroeco­
nomic policies, the fundamentals that enable private enterprise to operate 
successfully. Our largest infrastructure development was the Jurong 
industrial estate, which eventually covered 9,000 acres, with roads, sew­
ers, drainage, power, gas, and water all laid out. It had a slow start. By 
1961, we had issued only 12 pioneer certificates. (During 1963-1965, our 
years in Malaysia, none were issued by the central government in Kuala 
Lumpur.) As finance minister, Keng Swee used to attend the foundation­
laying ceremony and later the official opening of the factory, to create two 
occasions for publicity over one factory. He did this even for the smallest 
factory employing a mere handful of workers, like the one making moth­
balls. When Jurong lay largely empty, people called it "Gob's Folly," as 
Keng Swee himself recalled after investments had flowed in. He was not 
that self-deprecatory when J urong was barren. 
By the end of 1970, however, we had issued 390 pioneer certificates 
giving investors tax-free status for up to five years, extended to 10 years 
for those issued after 1975. Jurong was humming with activity. Our 
break came with a visit by Texas Instruments in October 1968. It wanted 
to set up a plant to assemble semiconductors, at that time a high­
technology product, and was able to start production within 50 days of its 
decision. Close on its heels came National Semiconduct or. 
Soon after, its competitor, Hewlett-Packard (HP), sent out a scout. 
Our EDB officer had worked on him, getting him any information he 
needed immediately, and would not give up until he agreed to visit 
Singapore to see for himself. He was as impressed as Texas Instruments. 
An EDB project officer was assigned to look after his delegation and 
62 From Third World to First 
everything was made convenient and swift. While HP negotiated to 
acquire a site for its own factory, it decided to lease the top two floors of a 
six-story building. The elevator to lift the heavy machinery needed a big 
transformer for electricity, but there was none in place in time for the visit 
of Mr. Hewlett himself. Rather than have him walk up six flights of 
stairs, the EDB got a gigantic cable extended from a neighboring build­
ing, and on the day of the visit the elevator worked. Hewlett-Packard 
invested. These stories went through the boardrooms of the American 
electronics industry, and other American electronics companies soon fol­
lowed. During this period, China was in the mad throes of Mao's Cultural 
Revolution. Most investors thought Taiwan and Hong Kong too close to 
China and headed for Singapore. We welcomed everyone, but when we 
found a big investor with potential for growth, we went out of our way to 
help it get started. 
By the 1970s, glowing reports on Singapore had appeared in American 
magazines , including US News & World Report, Harper's, and Time. In 1970, 
General Electric (GE) set up six different facilities for electrical and elec­
tronic products, circuit breakers, and electric motors. By the late 1970s, 
GE was to become the largest single employer of labor in Singapore. 
American MNCs laid the foundations for Singapore's large high-tech elec­
tronics industry. Although we did not know it then, the electronics indus­
try was to mop up our unemployment and turn Singapore into a major 
electronics exporter in the 1980s. From Singapore they were later to 
expand into Malaysia and Thailand. 
Visiting CEOs used to call on me before they made their investment 
decisions. I thought the best way to convince them was to ensure that the 
roads from the airport to their hotel and to my office were neat and spruce, 
lined with shrubs and trees. When they drove into the lstana domain, they 
would see right in the heart of the city a green oasis, 90 acres of im­
maculate rolling lawns and woodland , and nestling between them a nine­
hole golf course. Without a word being said, they would know that 
Singaporeans were competent , disciplined, and reliable, a people who 
would learn the skills they required soon enough. American manufactur­
ing investments soon overtook those of the British, Dutch, and Japanese. 
We had carried the burden of unemployment from the time we first 
took office in 1959-so many young people seeking jobs that were not 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 63 
there. But by 1971, when the British forces left, I felt we had turned a 
corner. The number of unemployed did not rise although the British had 
discharge d their 30,000 workers and left another 40,000 without jobs, 
people who had served them. The American electronics companies had 
generated so many jobs that unemployment was no longer an issue. Then 
suddenly the Arab oil embargo struck, following the Arab-Israeli war of 
October 1973. The quadrupling of the price of oil set back the world 
economy. We urged our people to conserve energy and reduce consump­
tion of fuel and electricity. There was belt-tightening but no hardship. 
Economic growth slowed down significantly from 13 percent (1972) to 4 
percent ( 197 5) while inflation rose from 2 .1 percent ( 1972) to 22 percent 
(1974). To my relief, we did not suffer a big loss of jobs; our unemploy­
ment rate remained around 4.5 percent. 
After recovery in 1975, we could afford to be more selective. When 
our EDB officer asked how much longer we had to maintain protective 
tariffs for the car assembly plant owned by a local company, the finance 
director of Mercedes-Benz said brusquely, "Forever, " because our workers 
were not as efficient as Germans. We did not hesitate to remove the tariffs 
and allow the plant to close down. Soon afterward we also phased out pro­
tection for the assembly of refrigerators , air conditioners, television sets, 
radios, and other consumer electrical and electronic products. 
By the late 1970s, we had left our old problems of unemployment 
and lack of investments behind us. The new problem was how to improve 
the quality of the new investments and with it the education and skill 
levels of our workers. We had found our new hinterland in America, 
Europe, and Japan. Modern communications and transportation made it 
possible for us to link up with these once faraway countries. 
In 1997, we had nearly 200 American manufacturing companies with 
over S$19 billion worth of investments at book value. Not only were they 
the largest of our foreign investors, they constantly upgraded their tech­
nology and products. This reduced their unit labor costs, enabling them 
to pay higher wages without losing competitiveness. 
Japanese investments were modest in the 1960s and 1970s, well 
behind those of the British and the Dutch. I tried hard to get the Japanese 
interested, but they were not moving in strength into Southeast Asia to 
manufacture for export. In the 1960s and 1970s, the Japanese invested 
64 From Third World to First 
overseas merely to sell in domestic markets and did not invest much in 
Singapore because of our small market. But the success of the American 
MNCs later encouraged the Japanese to manufacture in Singapore for 
export to the United States, then Europe, and only much later to Japan. 
China opened up in the 1980s and Japanese investments started to trickle 
in. When the Japanese yen appreciated against all other major currencies 
as a result of the Plaza Accord in 1985, Japanese manufacturers relocated 
their middle-technology factories to Taiwan, Korea, Hong Kong, and 
Singapore and their lower-technology ones to Indonesia, Thailand, and 
Malaysia. When they discovered that their investments in Asia yielded 
much higher returns than those in America and Europe, East Asia became 
their major destination . By the mid-1990s, they had become the largest 
investors in manufacturing in East Asia. 
Our earliest investors had been the British. After the British forces 
withdrew from Singapore, many of their companies also left, following 
their flag. I had tried hard to get them to invest but they were suffering 
from a withdrawal syndrome , retreating from empire back to the security 
of their home base, which for them was then not productive because of 
trade union problems. Only after Singapore showed it could make the 
grade did the British come back in earnest in the late 1970s, this time not 
to process or trade in raw materials , but to manufacture high-value-added 
products such as pharmaceuticals. Beecham Pharmaceuticals set up a 
technologically advanced operation to manufacture semisynthetic peni­
cillin for the Asian market, especially Japan. 
It was the British, Dutch, and French who first came and incorpo­
rated these countries into the world economies through their empires. 
These former imperial powers, however, were slow to adjust to the new 
trade and investment patterns of the postcolonial era, and left the fields 
they had ploughed to be sown by the Americans and the Japanese. 
Several well-established MNCs in Singapore were victims of worldwide 
restructuring, technological discoveries , or market shifts. One example 
stands out in my memory. After several years the EDB finally convinced 
Rollei, the German camera manufacturer, to relocate in Singapore. High 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 65 
German wages had made them uncompetitive. I visited Rollei-Werke in 
Brunswick in 1970 just before Rollei started to transfer its entire produc­
tion to Singapore to manufacture cameras, flash guns, projectors, lenses, 
and shutters, and to produce cameras for other famous German camera 
brands. Together with the EDB, Rollei set up a center to train workers in 
precision mechanics , precision optics, toolmaking, and electromechanics. 
Rollei (Singapore) made excellent cameras but changes in the market and 
in technology caused poor sales. Its R&D was in Germany, its production 
base in Singapore. This led to poor planning and coordination. It concen­
trated its R&D on the slower-moving , professional photographic equip­
ment area, whereas the Japanese moved into ever simpler cameras with 
viewfinders and other gadgets like auto focus and talking range finders, 
all made possible by the computer chip the Germans were slow to 
develop. After 11 years, Rollei, both in Germany and Singapore, went 
into receivership. 
Rollei's failure was a great blow for Singapore because European 
investors interpreted it as a failure in the transfer of technology from 
Europeans to Singaporeans. The EDB had a difficult time explaining that 
Rollei's failure was because of changes in technology and markets. One 
consolation was that the 4,000 workers trained in precision engineering 
became a valuable base for the disk drive industry that arrived in 
Singapore in the 1980s. 
The EDB has been our primary agency to attract a steady flow of ever 
higher value-added investments. This has enabled Singapore to remain 
competitive in spite of rising wages and other costs. The officers are still 
some of the brightest of our graduates, mostly from universities in 
America, Britain, and Europe. The EDB's present chairman , Philip Yeo, 
is well known to CEOs of MNCs as energetic and dependable, able to 
deliver whatever the EDB has promised. 
Looking back, I cannot claim that our economic development and indus­
trialization worked as we had planned. The early plans before separation 
were made on the assumption of a common market with Malaysia. 
Guinness had already paid a deposit for a site in Jurong for a brewery 
66 From Third World to First 
when Tan Siew Sin, the Malaysian finance minister, told Alan Lennox­
Boyd, the Guinness chairman, that he would not allow even one bottle of 
stout to be imported. So Lennox-Boyd set up his brewery in Kuala 
Lumpur and offered to allow us to forfeit his deposit. We returned it. 
Years later we repaid Tan Siew Sin's compliment when we refused to 
reduce the import duty on stout from Malaysia. Guinness settled on a 
Singapore brewery to produce it for them under license. 
We left most of the picking of winners to the MNCs that brought 
them to Singapore. A few, such as ship-repairing, oil-refining and petro­
chemicals, and banking and finance, were picked by the EDB or Sui Sen, 
our minister of finance, or myself personally. Our ministry of trade and 
industry believed there could be breakthroughs in biotechnology, com­
puter products, specialty chemicals, and telecommunication equipment 
and services. When we were unsure how new research and development 
would turn out, we spread our bets. 
Our job was to plan the broad economic objectives and the target 
periods within which to achieve them. We reviewed these plans regularly 
and adjusted them as new realities changed the outlook. Infrastructure 
and the training and education of workers to meet the needs of employers 
had to be planned years in advance. We did not have a group of ready­
made entrepreneurs such as Hong Kong gained in the Chinese industrial­
ists and bankers who came fleeing from Shanghai, Canton, and other 
cities when the communists took over. Had we waited for our traders to 
learn to be industrialists we would have starved. It is absurd for critics to 
suggest in the 1990s that had we grown our own entrepreneurs, we would 
have been less at the mercy of the rootless MNCs. Even with the experi­
enced talent Hong Kong received in Chinese refugees, its manufacturing 
technology level is not in the same class as that of the MNCs in 
Singapore. 
The government took the lead by starting new industries such as steel 
mills (National Iron and Steel Mills) and service industries such as a ship­
ping line, Neptune Orient Lines (NOL), and an airline, Singapore 
Airlines (SIA). Two ministers were outstanding in their versatility . Hon 
Sui Sen seeded the Development Bank of Singapore, the Insurance 
Corporation of Singapore, and the Singapore Petroleum Company. Goh 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 67 
Keng Swee conceived of our shipping line, NOL, and through the 
Pakistani government, recruited Captain M. J. Sayeed to start it up. With 
the help of Sir Lawrence Hartnett, an Australian expert in ordnance pro­
duction, Keng Swee set up Chartered Industries of Singapore (CIS), a 
mint, and a factory for small ammunition , placed together because both 
required tight security and good production tooling. With a practical and 
resourceful executive director, Ong Kah Kok, CIS succeeded. Philip Yeo, 
a young permanent secretary, and later chairman of the EDB, took over 
CIS from Ong Kah Kok and added new activities that later spun off into 
Singapore Technologies, a high-tech company that, among other things, 
set up wafer fabrication plants in joint venture with top MNCs. 
We had to put our faith in our young officers who had integrity, 
intellect, energy, drive, and application but no record of business acumen. 
Our top scholars had been chosen from the best of each year's crop of stu­
dents and sent to the top universities in Britain, Canada, Australia, New 
Zealand, Germany, France, Italy, and Japan, and later, when we could 
afford it, America. We made them our entrepreneurs to start up successful 
companies like NOL and SIA. I was fearful that these enterprises would 
result in subsidized and loss-making nationalized corporations as had 
happened in many new countries. Sui Sen, who knew his young officers, 
assured me that it was possible to succeed, that they could match our 
competitors in these businesses. And he had given clear instructions that 
the enterprises had to be profitable or be shut down. Both Keng Swee and 
Kim San, with whom I discussed these bold plans, thought it worth the 
risk, given the dearth of entrepreneurs. I relied on the judgment of Sui 
Sen who had picked the officers for the jobs. The projects succeeded. As a 
result, many new companies sprang up under the auspices of other minis­
ters and their ministries. When these also were successful, we turned state 
monopolies such as the PUB (Public Utilities Board), the PSA (Port of 
Singapore Authority), and Singapore Telecom into separate entities, free 
from ministerial control, to be run as companies , efficient, profitable , and 
competitive. 
The key to success was the quality of the people in charge. Not all our 
top administrators possess business acumen, an intangible gift. Several 
did. National Iron and Steel Mills with Howe Yoon Chong as chairman, 
68 From Third World to First 
Keppel Corporation with Sim Kee Boon, and Singapore Airlines with Joe 
Pillay became household names, leading stocks on the main board of the 
Stock Exchange of Singapore. When SIA was privatized , we had difficulty 
finding top-quality executives to replace Joe Pillay, such was the scarcity 
of entrepreneurial talent. 
If I have to choose one word to explain why Singapore succeeded, it is con­
fidence. This was what made foreign investors site their factories and 
refineries here. Within days of the oil crisis in October 1973, I decided to 
give a clear signal to the oil companies that we did not claim any special 
privilege over the stocks of oil they held in their Singapore refineries. If 
we blocked export from those stocks, we would have enough oil for our 
own consumption for two years, but we would have shown ourselves to be 
completely undependable. I met the CEOs or managing directors of all 
the oil refineries-Shell , Mobil, Esso, Singapore Petroleum , and British 
Petroleum on 10 November 1973. I assured them publicly that Singapore 
would share in any cuts they imposed on the rest of their customers, on 
the principle of equal misery. Their customers were in countries as far 
apart as Alaska, Australia, Japan, and New Zealand, besides those in the 
region. 
This decision increased international confidence in the Singapore 
government , that it knew its long-term interest depended on being a reli­
able place for oil and other business. As a result, the oil industry confi­
dently expanded into petrochemicals in the late 1970s. By the 1990s, 
with a total refining capacity of 1.2 million barrels per day, Singapore had 
become the world's third largest oil-refining center after Houston and 
Rotterdam, the third largest oil trading center after New York and 
London, and the largest fuel oil bunker market in volume terms. 
Singapore is also a major petrochemical producer. 
To overcome the natural doubts of investors from advanced countries 
over the quality of our workers, I had asked the Japanese, Germans , 
French, and Dutch to set up centers in Singapore with their own instruc­
tors to train technicians. Some centers were government-financed , others 
were jointly formed with such corporations as Philips, Rollei, and Tata. 
Surviving Without a Hinterland 69 
After 4 co 6 months of training, these workers, who were trained in a 
factory-like environme nt, became familiar with the work systems and cul­
tures of the different nations and were desirable employees. These train­
ing institutes became useful points of reference for investors from these 
countries to check how our workers compared with theirs. They validated 
the standards of Singapore workers. 
5. Creating a Financi al Center 
Anyone who predicted in 1965 when we separated from Malaysia that 
Singapore would become a financial center would have been thought 
mad. How did it happen, the gleaming modern office blocks in the city 
center with banks of computers linking Singapore with London, New 
York, Tokyo, Frankfurt, Hong Kong, and other major financial centers? 
It had a most improbable start in 1968. In his oral history, Dr. 
Winsemius recalls his telephone call to his friend, the vice president of the 
Bank of America branch in Singapore, who was then in London. "Look here, 
Mr. Van Oenen, we [Singapore} want, within 10 years, to be the financial 
center in Southeast Asia." Van Oenen replied, "All right, you come to 
London. In five years you can develop it." Winsemius immediately went to 
London where Van Oenen took him to a large globe standing in a board­
room, and said, "Look here, the financial world begins in Zurich. Zurich 
banks open at 9 o'clock in the morning, later Frankfurt, later London. In the 
afternoon Zurich closes, then Frankfurt and London. In the meantime , New 
York is open. So London hands over financial money traffic to New York. In 
the afternoon New York closes; they had already handed over to San 
Francisco. When San Francisco closes in the afternoon , the world is covered 
with a veil. Nothing happens until next day, 9:00 A.M. Swiss time, then the 
Swiss banks open. If we put Singapore in between, before San Francisco 
closes, Singapore would have taken over. And when Singapore closes, it 
would have handed over to Zurich. Then, for the first time since creation, 
we will have a 24-hour round-the-world service in money and banking." 
72 From Third World to First 
Ac Winsemius's request, Van Oenen wrote a paper on the subject and 
sent it co Hon Sui Sen, chairman of the EDB, and Winsemius's special link 
to me. Sui Sen saw me to propose that we life foreign exchange control 
restrictions on all currency transactions between Singapore and territories 
outside the sterling area. We were still pare of the sterling area chat required 
exchange controls on the movement of money. When Sui Sen sounded out a 
Bank of England official on the possibility of setting up a foreign currency 
pool like Hong Kong's, which would allow us co have an Asian dollar mar­
ket, he was cold chat Hong Kong's arrangement was allowed for historical 
reasons, and warned that Singapore might have to leave the sterling area. I 
decided the risk was worth caking and cold Sui Sen co go ahead. The Bank 
of England did not force the issue and Singapore did not have co leave the 
sterling bloc. In any case, Britain dissolved it four years lacer. 
Unlike Hong Kong, Singapore could neither ride on the reputation of 
the City of London, an established financial center with its long history 
of international banking, nor depend on the backing of the Bank of England, 
a symbol of financial expertise, reliability, and trustworthiness. In 1968, 
Singapore was a Third World country. Foreign bankers needed to be assured 
of stable social conditions, a good working and living environment, efficient 
infrastructure, and a pool of skilled and adaptable professionals. We also had 
co convince them that our currency board and the Monetary Authority 
of Singapore (MAS) were capable of supervising the banking industry. 
Both Keng Swee and I had decided in 1965, soon after independence, that 
Singapore should not have a central bank that could issue currency and cre­
ate money. We were determined not co allow our currency co lose its value 
against the strong currencies of the big nations, especially the United States. 
So we retained our currency board which issued Singapore dollars only when 
backed by its equivalent value in foreign exchange. The MAS has all the 
powers of a central bank except the authority to issue currency notes. 
The MAS has been professional in its financial supervision, working 
according to laws, rules, and regulations that were periodically reviewed 
and revised to keep pace with developments in financial services. We had 
co fight every inch of the way co establish confidence in our integrity, 
competence, and judgment. The history of our financial center is the story 
of how we built up credibility as a place of integrity, and developed 
the officers with the knowledge and skills to regulate and supervise the 
Creating a Financial Center 73 
banks, security houses, and other financial institutions so that the risk of 
systemic failure is minimized. 
We made a modest start with an offshore Asian dollar market. It was 
the counterpart of the Eurodollar market; we called it "the Asian dollar 
market." Initially, this market was mainly an interbank market in Singa­
pore that obtained foreign currency funds from banks abroad for lending to 
banks in the region, and vice versa. Later the Asian dollar market traded in 
foreign exchange and financial derivatives in foreign currency denomi­
nated securities, and undertook loan syndication, bond issuance, and fund 
management. The Asian dollar market in 1997 exceeded US$500 billion, 
nearly three times the size of our domestic banking market. The growth 
was stupendous because it fulfilled a market need. International financial 
transactions increased exponentially as trade and investments spread across 
the globe to cover East Asia, with Singapore as one of its key nodes. 
In the early years from 1968 to 1985, we had the field all to ourselves 
in the region. We attracted international financial institutions by abolish­
ing withholding tax on interest income earned by nonresident depositors. 
All Asian dollar deposits were exempted from statutory liquidity and 
reserve requirements. By the 1990s, Singapore had become one of the 
larger financial centers of the world, with its foreign exchange market 
ranking fourth in size after London, New York, and only slightly behind 
Tokyo. Because of our success after the mid-l 980s, other countries in the 
region vied to develop international financial centers, some offering tax 
incentives more generous than ours. The foundations for our financial 
center were the rule of law, an independent judiciary, and a stable, compe­
tent, and honest government that pursued sound macroeconomic policies, 
with budget surpluses almost every year. This led to a strong and stable 
Singapore dollar, with exchange rates that dampened imported inflation. 
In the 1970s, we had a brush against a big name in the city of London. In 
March 1972, Jim Slater, a highly regarded British investor who special­
ized in asset stripping, came to see me in Singapore. When Ted Heath 
became prime minister, the press reported that he had placed his assets 
and stockholdings with Jim Slater to manage in a blind trust. Therefore, 
Slater had strong credentials. I had met him a year earlier at a 10 
74 From Third World to First 
Downing Street dinner hosted by Ted Heath. I welcomed Slater's partici­
pation in our stock market. 
Later, in 197 5, Sui Sen, then our finance minister, told me that Slater 
Walker Securities had engaged in manipulating the shares of Haw Par 
Brothers International, a public-listed company in Singapore. They had 
been siphoning off the assets of Haw Par and its subsidiaries illegally for 
the benefit of certain directors and themselves, conduct which amounted 
to criminal breach of trust: They were cheating the shareholders of Haw 
Par and the other companies. Investigation into a big name in the London 
Stock Exchange, if not justified, would give us a bad reputation. Should 
he proceed against Jim Slater? I decided that we had to if we were to 
maintain our standing as a well-managed stock exchange. 
The investigation revealed a conspiracy to systematically strip off the 
Haw Par assets, and this was only the tip of a much larger and wider swin­
dle. Slater Walker's criminal activities extended from Singapore to 
Malaysia, Hong Kong, and London, the final repository of the loot. They 
had used Haw Par subsidiaries in Hong Kong to purchase listed shares in 
Hong Kong then sold them to Spydar Securities, which was wholly owned 
by Slater Walker executives who shared these ill-gotten profits. The men 
responsible were Jim Slater, Richard Tarling, the chairman of Haw Par, 
and Ogilvy Watson, the managing director. Watson had returned to 
Britain before fleeing to Belgium with whom we did not have an extradi­
tion treaty. Slater and Tarling were resident in London. We sought the 
extradition of Tarling and Slater, but the British establishment did not 
extradite Slater. Instead, in 1979, after a three-year struggle through the 
London courts, the British home secretary ordered Tarling's extradition on 
only 5 of the 17 charges, the 5 carrying the lowest penalties. Tarling was 
prosecuted and sent to jail for six months on each of three charges of will­
ful nondisclosure of material facts in Haw Par's 197 2 consolidated profit 
and loss account. Years later, after he had ceased to be governor of the Bank 
of England, Gordon Richardson mumbled his regrets to me in my office 
that he could not help Singapore bring Slater to justice. 
The MAS's reputation for being thorough and uncompromising m 
admitting only financial institutions of repute was put to the test in the 
Creating a Financial Center 75 
1970s and 1980s when it denied a license to the Bank of Credit and 
Commerce International (BCCI). The BCCI swindle affected nearly all 
the big financial centers by the time it finally ended. Incorporated in 
Luxembourg by a Pakistani, the bank's shareholders included members 
of the royal families of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Abu Dhabi, and Dubai. It 
had about 400 branches or offices in 73 countries in Europe, the Middle 
East, Africa, and America. It applied for an offshore banking license in 
Singapore in 1973. We rejected the application because the bank was too 
new (it started only in 1972) and low in capitalization. It resubmitted its 
application in 1980. Again the MAS would not approve; its interna­
tional standing was poor. 
The BCCI did not give up. In 1982, Van Oenen, who had helped us 
establish the Asian dollar market, enquired about its application. Koh 
Beng Seng, who had taken over as manager of the banking and financial 
institutions department of the MAS, had been told by several central 
bankers that they had reservations about the BCCI. So when Van Oenen 
saw me, I decided it was best to support Koh Beng Seng. 
Not deterred, the BCCI tried again, this time through Harold Wilson. 
There was something strange about his letter. His practice had been to 
sign off in his own hand, "Yours sincerely Harold." This time the "Yours 
sincerely" was typewritten and he signed himself "(Harold) Wilson of 
Rievaulx. " I decided he was writing pro forma, to oblige a friend. 
Dishonest operations of the BCCI led to enormous losses for other 
banks. When it was closed down in July 1991, depositors and creditors 
had claims for US$ l l billion. Singapore escaped unscathed because we 
refused to compromise standards. 
The MAS also denied a license to the National Bank of Brunei which 
was run by a prominent Singapore Chinese businessman, Khoo Teck Puat. 
Khoo bought the National Bank of Brunei and arranged for the sultan's 
brother, Prince Mohamed Bolkiah, as the bank's president to write to the 
MAS in 1975 asking for a branch in Singapore. Another letter a few 
months later informed us that his brother, Prince Sufri Bolkiah, had been 
appointed executive deputy president. Because of Khoo's apparent politi­
cal backing by the Brunei royal family, the matter was referred to me by 
the MAS. I backed the MAS decision to turn it down in 1975 and again 
in 1983 when the bank reapplied. 
76 From Third World to First 
In 1986, the sultan issued an emergency order to close the National 
Bank of Brunei. There was a run on its deposits and suspicion of irregular­
ities in loans of S$ l .3 billion to Khoo's group of companies. He had used 
the funds of this bank for his own activities , among them an attempt to 
get a controlling interest in Standard Chartered Bank of London. His 
eldest son, who was chairman of the bank, was arrested in Brunei. Banks 
in Singapore, mainly foreign banks, had lent a total of S$419 million to 
the National Bank of Brunei. Khoo took two years to repay these debts. 
Through strict rules and rigorous supervision, the MAS under Koh 
Beng Seng helped Singapore to develop as a financial center. To meet the 
competition from international banks, the MAS encouraged the four 
largest local banks (known as the "Big Four") to acquire and merge with 
the smaller local banks to become bigger and stronger. The Big Four were 
ranked by Moody's, the U.S. rating agency, as financially among the 
strongest and best capitalized in the world. 
In 1985, the MAS had to help manage a crisis in the Stock Exchange of 
Singapore (SES). Malaysian speculato rs, particularly Tan Koon Swan, had 
deposited the shares of Pan Electric Industries and several Malaysian com­
panies with our stockbrokers as security for loans at a higher price than 
their actual market value, with an undertaking to redeem the shares by a 
certain date at an even higher price. When the stock market went down 
and they ran out of money, they were unable to redeem their shares at the 
price agreed. This caused several large firms of stockbrokers , members of 
the SES, to become insolvent. The SES was closed for three days while 
MAS officials, led by Koh Beng Seng, worked around the clock with the 
Big Four banks to arrange an emergency "lifeboat" fund of S$180 million 
to rescue the stockbrokers. Koh's efforts enabled the SES to avoid systemic 
market failure and to restore investor confidence. It was a messy business. 
To avoid a recurrence of such a crisis, we revised the Securities 
Industry Act to strengthen prudential requirements of stockbroking com­
panies. This gave their clients better protection from default by SES 
member firms, which in turn incorporated themselves to increase their 
capital. We allowed foreign participation in SES member companies , and 
also wholly foreign-owned companies that brought in essential expertise. 
Creating a Financial Center 77 
Because of these prudent changes we had made, the SES was able to ride 
the Black Monday global stock market crash on 19 October 1987, when 
Hong Kong's stock exchange had to close down for four days. 
Another advance for Singapore's financial center was the Singapore 
International Monetary Exchange (SIMEX). In 1984, the Gold Exchange 
of Singapore expanded its trade in gold futures to include financial 
futures and renamed itself SIMEX. To win the confidence of international 
financial institutions, we modeled SIMEX after the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange (CME) with its open outcry trading system. We also convinced 
the CME to adopt a mutual offset system with SIMEX that enabled 
round-the-dock trading. This revolutionary concept allowed an investor 
to establish a position at CME in Chicago and close off at SIMEX in 
Singapore , and vice versa, without paying additional margins. The U.S. 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission approved this arrangement. 
The mutual offset arrangement has functioned without hitches since the 
inception of SIMEX. In 1995, when a SIMEX trader, Nick Leeson of 
Barings, a venerable London bank, lost over a billion U.S. dollars specu­
lating on Nikkei Index Futures, he brought disaster upon Barings but did 
not affect SIMEX or cause losses to other SIMEX members or their cus­
tomers. 
In 1984, SIMEX started trading in Eurodollar interest rate futures 
contracts and soon afterward, the Euroyen. By 1998, SIMEX had listed a 
range of regional contracts including stock index futures of Japan, Taiwan, 
Singapore, Thailand, and Hong Kong. The London-based International 
Financing Review bestowed upon SIMEX the International Exchange of the 
Year award in 1998, the only Asian exchange ever to win this title, and the 
fourth time SIMEX had achieved this award. 
As our financial reserves grew with increased Central Provident Fund 
(CPF) savings (Singapore's pension scheme) and yearly public sector sur­
pluses, the MAS was not investing these funds long term for best returns. I 
asked Keng Swee to review this. He formed the Government of Singapore 
Investment Corporation (GIC) in May 1981 with me as chairman, himself 
as deputy chairman, and Sui Sen and several ministers as board members. 
Through Keng Swee's links with David Rothschild , we appointed N. M. 
78 From Third World to First 
Rothschild & Sons as consultants. They sent an experienced officer to work 
with us for several months to set up the GIC organization. We also 
employed American and British investment managers to help us develop 
our systems for the different kinds of investments. To lead the manage­
ment team, we appointed Yong Pung How as the GIC's first managing 
director. He secured James Wolfensohn, who later became the World Bank 
president, as adviser on investment strategy. Gradually, they built up a 
core of Singaporean professionals led by Ng Kok Song and Teh Kok Peng, 
who came over from the MAS. By the late 1980s, they and their staff had 
assumed the key management and investment responsibilities. 
At first, the GIC managed only the government 's financial reserves. 
By 1987, it was able to manage the reserves of the Board of Com­
missioners for Currency of Singapore and the long-term assets of the MAS 
as well. It was managing assets worth more than S$ l 20 billion in 1997. 
The GIC's most important responsibility was to allocate our investments 
between equities (stocks and shares), bonds (mainly bonds issued by the 
governments of developed countries ), and cash. There are books to explain 
the principles upon which the markets work, but they offer no certain 
guide to predicting future price movements, much less to making assured 
returns. In the volatile world of 1997-1998, the GIC could make or lose a 
few billion dollars just by the yen falling or the German mark rising dra­
matically against the U.S. dollar. Investing is a hazardous business. My 
cardinal objective was not to maximize returns but to protect the value of 
our savings and get a fair return on capital. In the 15 years since 1985, the 
GIC has outperformed relevant global investment benchmarks and more 
than preserved the value of our assets. 
However, Singapore's financial center was considered over-regulated com­
pared to Hong Kong's. Critics wrote, "In Hong Kong, what is not 
expressly forbidden is permitted ; in Singapore, what is not expressly per­
mitted is forbidden. " They forgot that Hong Kong enjoyed the backing 
of the British flag and the Bank of England. Singapore, with no such 
safety net, could not have recovered from so dramatic a fall as easily. It had 
first to establish its reputation on its own. Visiting foreign bankers used 
to tell me that Singapore's financial market would grow faster if we 
Creating a Financial Center 79 
allowed them to introduce new financial products without having to wait 
until they had been tried and tested elsewhere. I would listen carefully 
but did not intervene because I believed we needed more time to establish 
our standing and reputation. 
After I stepped down as prime minister in 1990, I had more time to 
delve into our banking sector and had working lunches with our 
Singapore bankers. One of them was Lim Ho Kee, a shrewd and successful 
foreign exchange dealer who was managing a major foreign bank in 
Singapore. He persuaded me to reexamine our policies which he said were 
overcautious and prevented our financial center from expanding and 
catching up with the activities of the more developed centers. I also had 
several brainstorming sessions in mid-1994 with other top Singaporean 
managers of foreign financial institutions. They convinced me that we 
had too much of our national savings locked up in the Central Provident 
Fund and that our statutory boards and government-linked companies 
were too conservative, placing their surpluses in bank deposits. They 
could have higher returns investing through experienced and well­
qualified international fund managers in Singapore. This would expand 
the fund management industry and bring in more fund managers who in 
turn would attract foreign funds for investment in the region. 
My views on our regulatory environment and banking practices 
began to change after 1992 when former U.S. secretary of state, George 
Shultz, who was chairman of the international advisory board of J. P. 
Morgan, a blue-ribbon U.S. bank, had me invited to be a member of this 
board. Through briefings and interaction with J. P. Morgan bankers in 
biannual meetings, I gained insights into their workings and saw how 
they were preparing themselves for globalized banking. I was struck by 
the quality of the members of this board which included the bank's direc­
tors. There were able and successful CEOs as well as former political lead­
ers from every major economic region of the world to give them different 
inputs. I was useful to them because of my personal knowledge of our 
region. Other members brought intimate knowledge of their own regions 
or their specialties. I learned how they viewed Southeast Asia compared to 
other emerging markets: Latin America, Russia, other members of the 
Soviet Union, and the other countries of Eastern Europe. I was impressed 
by the way they welcomed and prepared for innovation and change in 
80 From Third World to First 
banking especially with developments in information technology (IT). I 
concluded that Singapore was light-years behind them. 
As chairman of the GIC, I had discussions on a range of banking 
issues with CEOs of the big American, European, and Japanese banks, 
and learned how they saw the future of global banking. By comparison, 
Singapore banks were inward-looking. Their boards of directors were 
mainly Singaporeans, as were the principal bank executives. I expressed 
my concerns to the chairmen of three of our big banks--Oversea-Chinese 
Banking Corporation , United Overseas Bank, and Overseas Union Bank. 
From their responses I concluded they were not awake to the dangers of 
being inbred and of failing to be outward- and forward-looking in an age 
of rapid globalization. They were doing well, protected from competition . 
They wanted the government to continue to restrict foreign banks from 
opening more branches or even ATMs (automatic teller machines). I cau­
tioned them that, sooner or later, because of bilateral agreements with the 
United States or possibly World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements , 
Singapore would have to open up its banking industry and remove pro­
tection for local banks. 
I decided in 1997 to break this old mold. Singapore banks needed an 
infusion of foreign talent and a different mindset. If these three big banks 
would not move, then the DBS Bank, in which the government had a 
stake, should set the pace. After talent scouting in 1998, DBS Bank 
engaged John Olds, an experienced senior executive who was about to 
leave J. P. Morgan. He took over as deputy chairman and CEO to make 
the bank a major Asian player. Soon, Oversea-Chinese Banking Corpor­
ation appointed as CEO a Hong Kong banker, Alex Au. 
For over three decades, I had supported Koh Beng Seng on restricting 
the access of foreign banks to the local market. Now I believed the time 
had come for the tough international players to force our Big Four to 
upgrade their services or lose market share. There is a real risk that they 
may not be able to compete, in which case we may end up with no 
Singapore-owned and managed banks to depend on in a financial crisis. 
Gradually I concluded that Koh, deputy managing director of the 
banking and financial institutions group in the MAS, was not keeping up 
with the enormous changes sweeping the banking industry worldwide. 
He was too protective of our investors. I sought advice from Gerald 
Creating a Financial Center 81 
Corrigan, formerly president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
and Brian Quinn, formerly of the Bank of England. They advised me sep­
arately that Singapore could change its style and method of supervising 
the banks without any loss of rigor, and without increasing the risk of sys­
temic failure. Major financial centers such as New York and London con­
centrated on protecting not the different market players or the individual 
investors, but the system itself. Corrigan and Quinn convinced us that 
stronger and better-managed institutions should be given more leeway to 
assume risk. 
As I did not want to revamp the MAS myself, early in 1997, with the 
prime minister's permission, I involved Loong in the work. He began 
meeting bankers and fund managers and mastered the workings of our 
financial sector. On 1 January 1998, when the prime minister appointed 
him chairman of the MAS, he was ready to move. With the help of a few 
key officers, he reorganized and refocused the MAS, to implement the 
new approach to regulating and developing the financial sector. 
Loong and his team changed the MAS's approach co financial supervi­
sion; they did it with a lighter couch and were more open co industry pro­
posals and views. With advice from management consultants and indus­
try committees, they made policy changes that affected all parts of the 
financial sector. They took steps to promote the asset management indus­
try and amended the rules on the internationalization of the Singapore 
dollar, co promote the growth of the capital market. The MAS encouraged 
the SES (stock exchange) and SIMEX (futures exchange) co merge and free 
up commission rates and access to the exchanges. 
The MAS liberalized access to the domestic banking sector by allow­
ing qualifying foreign full banks co open more branches and ATMs. It 
lifted limits on foreign ownership of local bank shares while requiring the 
banks to set up nominating committees in their boards, modeled on sim­
ilar arrangements in many U.S. banks. These committees vet nominations 
to the board and key management appointments, co ensure that capable 
people are appointed who will look after the interests of all shareholde rs, 
not just the controlling shareholders. 
The banks believed that a lighter touch in MAS supervision would 
enable them co be more innovative in introducing new financial products. 
Perhaps we should have made these changes earlier. But only after the 
82 From Third World to First 
MAS had demonstrated the strength of its system to weather the financial 
crisis of 1987 and 1997-1998 did I feel confident enough to move closer 
to a position where what is not expressly forbidden is permitted. Our cau­
tious approach helped us weather the 1997-1998 East Asian financial cri­
sis. Our banks were sound and not overextended. No bubble puffed up 
our stock market. It has taken us 30 years from the time we first launched 
the Asian dollar market in 1968 to establish our credentials as a soundly 
managed international financial center. 
From July 1997, when the financial crisis broke out in East Asia with the 
devaluation of the Thai baht, disasters devastated the currencies , stock 
markets, and economies of the region. But no bank in Singapore faltered. 
Investors were rushing to get out of emerging markets, under which 
Singapore was classified. When fund managers were fearful of hidden 
traps, withholding information was not an intelligent response. We 
decided on the maximum disclosure of information. To enable the investor 
to judge the value of our assets, we persuaded our banks to abandon their 
practice of maintaining hidden reserves and not disclosing their nonper­
forming loans. Our banks disclosed their regional loan exposures. They 
made substantial additional general provisions for their regional loans, 
dealing with the potential problems upfront instead of waiting for loans to 
turn bad. Because of the competent steps the MAS had taken to deal with 
the crisis, Singapore consolidated its position as a financial center. 
6. Winning Over the Unions 
I started my political life fighting for the unions as their legal adviser and 
negotiator. By the mid-1950s, the communists had gained control of 
most of them, and both communist and noncommunist unions had 
turned combative. To attract investments, we had to free unions from 
communist control and educate union leaders and workers on the need to 
create new jobs by getting investments. This was easier said than done. 
Given the communist hold on our unions, it was inevitable that we 
suffered endless strikes, slowdowns , and riots from the late 1940s to the 
1960s. Between July 1961 and September 1962, we had 153 strikes, a 
record for Singapore. In 1969, for the first time since before the war, we 
had no strikes or work stoppages. How did we do this? 
Singapore's British-style trade union practices had been the bane of 
our labor movement. To counter communist influence , the colonial gov­
ernment brought in such advisers as Jack Brazier from the British Trade 
Union Congress. To draw noncommunist union leaders away from com­
munist influence, these advisers taught them all the bad habits and prac­
tices of how to squeeze employers for more pay and benefits regardless of 
the consequences to the company. At a meeting in July 1966 of the Army 
Civil Service Union of workers employed by the British forces, I urged 
them to abandon these British union practices which had ruined Britain's 
economy. I admitted that I had been responsibl e for many of them when I 
was negotiating for the unions. At that time there was too much exploita­
tion of our workers. But the consequences were so bad, adding to our 
84 From Third World to First 
unemployment, chat I regretted having done this. For example, triple pay 
on public holidays had led to cleansing workers deliberately allowing 
garbage to accumulate before public holidays to ensure chat they would 
have to work on these holidays. The purpose of public holidays was to 
give the workers leisure, but our workers wanted more pay, not more 
leisure. So I asked union leaders to update our trade union practices. 
To stress how strongly I held these views, I repeated chem in the pres­
ence of Internacional Labour Organisation officials and union leaders from 
the rest of Asia at a meeting of its Asian advisory committee in November 
1966. I told our union leaders chat they must not kill the goose whose 
golden eggs we needed. Our unions, I said, had been part of a political 
movement against the British. Political leaders-and I was one of them­
had offered workers the carrot of independence, saying, "Come with me co 
freedom and I will give you what the British employer gives to his British 
workers." That promise we must now fulfill, but to do so, we had to 
reestablish "supervision, discipline, and working norms" to get efficiency. 
Each year 30,000 school leavers sought work. Our union practices, I 
explained , were forcing employers co become capital-intensive , investing in 
expensive machines to get the work done with the minimum of workers, as 
in Britain. This had created a small group of privileged unionized workers 
getting high pay and a growing band of underpaid and underemployed 
workers. If we maintained our cohesiveness and stability, and did not repeat 
past stupidities that had shaken confidence, we should overcome these 
problems. We needed new attitudes, the most important of which was that 
pay must accord with performance, not time spent on the job. 
The unions and workers were so shaken by separation and fearful at 
the prospect of British withdrawal chat they accepted my hard-headed 
approach. They knew we faced an emergency that could threaten our exis­
tence as an independent nation. 
The National Trades Union Congress (NTUC) secretary-general, Ho 
See Beng, a PAP MP and an old colleague from my trade union days, 
protested against my policies, such as the abolition of triple pay for work 
on public holidays. He and his union colleagues had to respond to ground 
pressure co keep the rank and file on their side and not be outflanked by 
the communise union leaders. I had to override his protests but cook care 
co meet the union leaders privately to explain my worries. These off-the-
Winning Over the Unions 85 
record meetings made them understand why I had to get a new frame­
work in place, one that would make for a trim and lean workforce. 
There was one landmark confrontation with an irrational and igno­
rant trade union leader who did not understand the changed circum­
stances. K. Suppiah was president of the Public Daily Rated Employees ' 
Unions Federation. In an ultimatum to the governme nt on 18 October 
1966, he demanded settlement of all outstanding grievances arising out 
of an alleged nonimplementation of a collective agreement made in 1961, 
wanting S$ l per day increase for his 15,000 daily rated workers. 
Suppiah and I had worked together for many years from the 1950s in 
the old City Council days. He was an uneducat ed man born in India, a 
rabble-rouser in Tamil (the language of Madras), and a determined and 
stubborn leader. Negotiating with him was disconcerting because he was 
squint-eyed and did not seem to be looking at you. He led a union, the 
majority of whose members were immigrant Indian unskilled laborers 
brought over from Madras by the British to do cleansing work. He did 
not understand that we were no longer in the happy, riotous 1950s when 
union power was waxing; that in newly independent Singapore, on its 
own and highly vulnerable , the government could not allow any union to 
jeopardize Singapore's survival. I met him and his union leaders. In a 40-
minute exchange, I said I could consider a wage increase for the 1968 
budget, but not for 1967. I warned that 7,000 of his members were 
Indian nationals who now needed work permits to continue working. If 
they went on strike they could well lose their jobs and would have to 
return to India. Suppiah was not impressed. Only 2,000 or 3,000, he said, 
were on work permits and he would go on with the strike. If the union 
was broken, then let it be broken by Mr. Lee. He accused me of having 
forgotten that I owed my position as prime minister largely to the trade 
union movement. 
Suppiah called for a strike by the Public Daily Rated Employees' 
Unions Federation on 29 December, just before the New Year festivities. I 
asked them to reconsider their decision, and referred the dispute to the 
Industrial Arbitration Court. This made any strike by the workers unlaw­
ful and I issued a statement to draw their attention to this. 
The ministry of health implemented their new work system for cleans­
ing workers in January 1967. On 1 February 1967, about 2,400 workers of 
86 From Third World to First 
the Public Daily Rated Cleansing Workers' Union, a member of Suppiah's 
federation, went on a wildcat strike. A defiant Suppiah warned the govern­
ment that if the cleansing workers' grievances were not settled within a 
week, all 14,000 workers in his federation's other daily rated unions would 
go on sympathy strike. 
The police arrested and charged Suppiah and 14 other leaders of the 
cleansing workers' union with calling an illegal strike. The registrar of 
trade unions issued notices to the union and the federation to show cause 
why they should not be deregiscered. At the same time, the ministry of 
health declared that the strikers had sacked themselves; those who wished 
to be reemployed could apply the next day. This coordinated firmness 
panicked the strikers. Ninety percent of them applied for reemployment. 
Two months lacer, both the Public Daily Raced Cleansing Workers' 
Union and Suppiah's federation of unions were deregiscered. 
This strike was a turning point in Singapore's industrial history. The 
way the government met it head-on won the support of the public. It 
triggered a change in union culture, from a defiant flouting of the law 
to reasonable give-and-take. I was able to swing public opinion round 
further. In a series of speeches to the unions, I prepared the workers for 
the changes we planned to make to the labor laws. We banned all strikes 
in certain essential services and made each statutory board have its own 
union. 
At an NTUC Delegates' Conference in early 1968, I convinced them 
that industrial relations between employers and workers were more 
important for our survival than wage increases, and that together we had 
to get the labor movement into better shape by cutting out restrictive 
practices and the abuse of fringe benefits. I depended on them as leaders 
to create a new labor movement with a reputation for realistic policies 
that benefited workers. Recounting Britain's prodigal years of crippling 
dock strikes which led to the devaluation of the pound sterling in 1967, I 
warned, "If that happens here at our harbour I will declare this high trea­
son. I will move against the strike leaders. Charges will be brought in 
court later. I will get the port going straight away. The Singapore dollar 
will never be devalued and I think the people of Singapore expect this of 
their government. " I spotlighted the "selfishness of established labour." 
Cargo handled by the Port of Singapore Authority in 1967 increased by 
Win ning Over the Unions 87 
over 10 percent, but the number of workers employed did not go up 
because the extra work was all taken up by overtime. This was immoral at 
a time of high unemployment. I told the union delegates that we must rid 
ourselves of pernicious British-style trade union practices. 
For balance, I told a meeting of employers that they had to be fair to 
their workers if they wanted maximum effort from them, that where 
unions and employers were not in agreement on basic objectives, the 
result had been ruinous for the economy. I urged our employers to do 
their part so that our workers would put in their maximum effort to get 
maximum rewards: direct rewards in their wages and benefits, and indi­
rect returns through government revenue by way of homes, health, educa­
tion, and social benefits. 
Britain's announcement in January 1968 of the withdrawal of its mil­
itary forces heightened people's anxieties. I seized that moment to make 
radical reforms to rid us of those union practices that had usurped 
employers' prerogatives and eroded management's ability to conduct its 
own business. After we won reelection in April 1968 with an overwhelm­
ing mandate, Parliament passed the Employment Act and the Industrial 
Relations (Amendment) Act that same year. Later, the Trade Unions Act 
was amended. These laws spelled out minimum employment conditions 
and placed limits on retrenchment benefits, overtime bonuses, and fringe 
benefits. They set out uniform provisions for rest days, public holidays, 
working days, annual leave, maternity leave, and sick leave. They restored 
to management the right to hire and fire, to promote and transfer, func­
tions the unions had encroached upon during the years of industrial strife. 
They laid the foundation for industrial peace. 
We made it illegal for a trade union to take strike or industrial action 
without a secret ballot. If it did so, the union and its officers would be 
liable to prosecution. This stopped the practice of voting by an open show 
of hands where dissenters were intimidated into acquiescence. 
Seah Mui Kok, a union leader and PAP MP, another old friend from 
my time with the unions, objected to the wide latitude given to employ­
ers to hire and fire, but accepted the need for unions to be less confronta­
tional to create a better climate for foreign investments. I included safe­
guards against misuse of these powers. These changes in employment and 
industrial relations laws and practices brought tangible benefits. Within a 
88 From Third World to First 
year, in 1969, 5 2 new factories were built, creating 17,000 new jobs. In 
1970, new investments added 20,000 jobs. Incomes increased. 
In 1972, we set up the National Wages Council (NWC), with repre­
sentatives from unions, management , and government. Every year, using 
facts and figures available to the governme nt, the NWC reached a wide 
consensus recommendation on wage increases and other terms and con­
ditions of service for the coming year that would be affordable and 
would promote further economic growth. Its joint recommendations were 
accepted as general guidelines, with variations for the different sectors, 
for all union-management negotiations. From its early years, all parties 
agreed on the principle that wage increases must not exceed productivity 
increases. 
The deep sense of crisis that prevailed made it possible for me to turn 
around union attitudes in a few years. The danger of an economic collapse 
because British forces were about to leave altered the mood and attitudes 
of the people. They realized that unless we made a U-turn from strikes 
and violence toward stability and economic growth, we would perish. 
I got management to undertake their new role of winning worker 
cooperation, without which productivity could not increase. Strict laws 
and tough talk alone could not have achieved this. It was our overall pol­
icy that convinced our workers and union leaders to support our key 
objective: to establish international confidence in Singapore and attract 
investments and create jobs. But ultimately it was the trust and confi­
dence they had in me, gained over long years of association, that helped 
transform industrial relations from one of militancy and confrontation to 
cooperation and partnership. 
In 1969, Devan Nair returned to Singapore from Kuala Lumpur at my 
urging, to lead the NTUC again. He had stayed on there after being 
elected to the Malaysian Parliament in 1964. I needed him in Singapore 
to play a key role in maintaining industrial peace and persuading our 
workers to increase productivity and efficiency. It was an enormous advan­
tage for me to have Devan as secretary-general of the NTUC. He coordi­
nated and fine-tuned my policies and inculcated positive work attitudes 
Winn ing Over the Unio ns 89 
in the unions. As NTUC leader from 1970 to 1981, when Parliament 
elected him president of Singapore , he got union leaders to face the chal­
lenge of competition in world markets. Each time Winsemius visited 
Singapore, he with his liaison officer, Ngiam Tong Dow, would brief 
Devan on the economic and employment situation. Devan taught the 
union leaders the basic principles of economics and helped make the tri­
partite NWC a success. 
One problem he faced was the decline in union membership because 
of reduced union militancy. To counter this trend, Devan held a modern­
ization seminar in November 1969 and convinced the union delegates of 
the need to modernize their functions to meet the changed environment. 
They set up several union cooperative enterprises. In 1970, the NTUC set 
up a taxi cooperative called NTUC Comfort which helped to break the 
pirate (unlicensed) taxi racket rampant in the 1960s. It started with 200 
Morris Oxford taxis and 200 British Austin minibuses paid for out of 
British loans from their aid package. By 1994, with 10,000 taxis and 200 
school buses, it was corporatized and listed on the Stock Exchange of 
Singapore as Comfort Group Limited. To lower the cost of living for its 
members , the NTUC started a consumer cooperative in 197 3 called 
NTUC Welcome to run shops, stores, and supermarkets. Later, as NTUC 
Fairprice , it became a successful supermarket chain that kept prices of 
basic consumer goods near wholesalers' costs. NTUC Income, an insur­
ance cooperative , began in 1970 with life insurance , then went on to 
motor insurance and other fields. It employed professional actuaries and 
experienced managers. Union leaders sat on the boards of directors to 
oversee the professional managers of these enterprises and soon under­
stood that good management was critical for success. 
Renewing its leadership has enabled the NTUC to keep itself relevant 
to a younger generation of workers. When Devan resigned in 1981 to 
become president , Lim Chee Onn, a 37-year-old political secretary, took 
over as secretary-general. He had worked under Devan after becoming a 
member of Parliament in 1977. A first-class graduate in naval architec­
ture from the University of Glasgow, he brought sound management 
90 From Third World to First 
methods to his union work. However, his interpersonal skills were not as 
good as Devan's, and misunderstanding arose between him and older 
union leaders who claimed they found him somewhat unapproachable. 
This was a problem I faced each time there was a change of genera­
tion between leaders. Chee Onn was more than 20 years younger than 
Devan. The union leaders of Devan's generation were used to Devan and 
did not take to Chee Onn's different work style. The basic problem was 
that the old leaders did not welcome a sudden infusion of young blood. 
At my suggestion, Chee Onn had brought in several young graduates to 
help him. This added to the discomfort of the older union leaders. I con­
cluded that it would be difficult for him to get on with them. Chee Onn 
took this as a personal failure and resigned from politics in 1982. He 
went into the private sector, joining Keppel Corporation, one of our 
largest government-linked companies. He was a success as a corporate 
leader, and a tower of strength to Sim Kee Boon, who had retired as head 
of the civil service to be chairman of the corporation. 
Devan and I agreed that Ong Teng Cheong, then minister for com­
munications and concurrently minister for labor, would get on with the 
older union leaders. He was in his forties, nine years older than Chee Onn, 
and I believed there would be less of a generational difference. I persuaded 
Teng Cheong to work with the unions. He agreed and by 1983 was elected 
NTUC secretary-general. He remained in the cabinet; it worked well since 
the unions had their interests represented and the government was able to 
take their views into consideration when discussing policies. Teng Cheong, 
an architect trained in Adelaide University, has a good command of 
English. Being Chinese-educated , he is also fluent in Mandarin and 
Hokkien, his mother tongue. He got on well with both union leaders and 
the rank-and-file workers. He took the NTUC into new fields, providing 
members with better leisure and recreational facilities. I had encouraged 
him in this, but he needed little encouragement. What he required were 
financial resources and political support, which I gave him. 
The NTUC expanded into health services, child care, a broadcasting 
station, a seaside resort hotel for workers called Pasir Ris Resort, and a 
country club, the Orchid Country Club with a golf course by Seletar 
reservoir. It also developed quality condominiums its members could buy. 
These new cooperative enterprises gave more union leaders hands-on 
Winnin g Over the Unions 91 
experience in running enterprises. Successive generations of new leaders 
learned about good management. These clubs, resorts, and other facilities 
provided workers with lifestyles previously available only to the better­
off. I believed these facilities would reduce the feeling that workers 
belonged to a lower order, excluded from lifestyles which only the suc­
cessful enjoyed. To make them affordable, the government provided state 
land at nominal prices. 
For many years I had been urging the NTUC to set up a labor college. 
In 1990, with help from the principal of Ruskin College, Teng Cheong 
established an Institute of Labour Studies to teach industrial relations and 
leadership development. 
When Teng Cheong was elected president of Singapore in 1993, Lim 
Boon Heng, 12 years younger, then second minister for trade and indus­
try, took over as secretary-general of the NTUC. He graduated in naval 
architecture from the University of Newcastle-upon-T yne and had 
worked with the unions since 1981, where his good interpersonal skills 
had been a great asset. He brought in well-educated and talented young 
men in their twenties and thirties who had done well in universities 
abroad and had fresh ideas. This input of new blood rejuvenated the 
thinking and attitudes of union leaders and produced results for the 
unions. Like Teng Cheong, Boon Heng remained a cabinet minister, for­
malizing a pattern of cooperation between the unions and the government 
that has served Singapore well. 
I launched a productivity movement in the early 1980s because I was 
impressed by Japanese practitioners. I encouraged NTUC leaders to work 
with management to introduce quality control circles (QCCs), groups of 
workers who together put up suggestions on how to improve work, save 
time and costs, and achieve zero defects. Progress was slow. Following 
Japanese company practice, QCCs whose suggestions resulted in savings 
or improvements had their photos displayed and were awarded small 
prizes or bonuses. The Japan Productivity Centre helped with experts, 
training fellowships, training materials , equipment, and software. Every 
now and again I would speak at award ceremonies and present the annual 
productivity prizes. 
92 From Third World to First 
On one occasion, in 1987, after presenting a prize to the managing 
director of a Japanese company, I asked why his local workers were 
less productive than his Japanese workers although they used the same 
machines. His honest reply was that Japanese workers were more skilled, 
more multiskilled , more flexible, and more adaptable , with less absen­
teeism and job-hopping. Singapore technicians , group leaders, and super­
visors were unwilling to undertake work that would soil their hands. In 
contrast, their Japanese counterparts considered themselves not as white­
or blue-collar workers, but as grey-collar workers; they would readily help 
operate and maintain machines and so better understood the problems of 
workers. 
Devan had been struck by the achievements of Japanese unions. He 
got two octopus-like general unions to reorganize themselves into nine 
industrial unions. In 1982, Chee Onn, who was then NTUC secretary­
general, initiated the change from industrial to house unions. It made for 
better communication between union leaders and workers, and leaders 
could focus on the specific issues and problems of their own company 
with management. In 1984, the NTUC, convinced of the benefits, 
adopted a resolution to support house unions. 
In most cases, house unions increased union membership. They 
encouraged openness and trust, and were good for labor-management 
relations. However, in the 1990s, Boon Heng found that house unions did 
not function as well as they did in Japan. Singapore companies are too 
small, most with less than a thousand workers, compared with tens of 
thousands in Japanese companies. Furthermore, unlike Singapore, in 
Japan, executives , university graduates , and other professionals can join 
unions. Singapore house unions do not have enough well-educated mem­
bers for leadership positions. They have to depend on the NTUC for help 
when negotiating with employers. We have to find a solution to this 
problem without re-creating the disadvantages of omnibus unions. 
These changes to unionism in Singapore were achieved with few 
strikes or industrial disputes. The maturing of the trade union movement 
and its leaders was helped by several dedicated and able officers I had sec­
onded from the government administrative service to the NTUC Labour 
Research Unit in 1962, after the communist unions broke away in 1961 
from the Singapore Trade Union Congress to form their own union feder-
Winnin g Over the Unio ns 93 
ation, leaving the noncommunist unions without sufficient skilled nego­
tiators. One of the officers I sent was S. R. Nathan, who had been a social 
worker. He had good judgment and worked well with the union leaders. 
Nathan later became permanent secretary of the foreign affairs ministry 
and our ambassador in Washington. In 1999, he became president of 
Singapore. Another was Hsu Tse Kwang, an energetic "doer" who later 
became our income tax commissione r. They helped the noncommunist 
union leaders in their collective bargaining and in presenting their cases 
in the Industrial Arbitration Court. They educated union leaders on the 
realities of economic survival for Singapore and in the process forged an 
NTUC leadership that was realistic and practical. Later, in the 1990s, I 
encouraged promising returned scholars to take up full-time careers in 
the NTUC to beef up its research and negotiating capabilities. With uni­
versal education and numerous scholarships , by then all the bright chil­
dren of poor parents had made it to university. Able union leaders who 
rose from the ranks became few and far between. 
To maintain the symbiotic relationship between the PAP government 
and the NTUC, I encouraged the NTUC to get some MPs to work full­
time with the unions, and to appoint others as advisers to various unions. 
These MPs raised union issues in Parliament. Such additions to the 
unions' manpower capabilities made a qualitative difference. Without 
their disciplined intellectual input and their easy access to ministers, the 
case for the unions would not be put across in a way that would command 
attention and from time to time bring about a revision of policies. 
We have put in place a fair framework to govern industrial relations. 
Restrictions on unions' excesses are balanced by consultative and arbitra­
tion procedures through which the unions can protect the interests of the 
workers. The key to peace and harmony in society is a sense of fair play, 
that everyone has a share in the fruits of our progress. 
The NTUC's positive approach to problems helped reduce unemploy­
ment from 14 percent in 1965 to 1.8 percent in 1997. For 25 years, from 
1973 to 1997, average real wages increased yearly by just under 5 percent. 
We suffered a reverse in the Asian financial crisis of 1997: Unemployment 
increased to 3.2 percent in 1998. To regain our competitivene ss, the 
unions and government agreed and implemented a package of measures 
that reduced wages and other costs by 15 percent from 1 January 1999. 
7. A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 
We believed in socialism, in fair shares for all. Later we learned that per­
sonal motivation and personal rewards were essential for a productiv e 
economy. However, because people are unequal in their abilities, if perfor­
mance and rewards are determined by the marketplace, there will be a few 
big winners, many medium winners, and a considerable number of losers. 
That would make for social tensions because a society's sense of fairness is 
offended. 
A competitive , winner-takes-all society, like colonial Hong Kong in 
the 1960s, would not be acceptable in Singapore. A colonial government 
did not have to face elections every five years; the Singapore government 
did. To even out the extreme results of free-market competition , we had 
to redistribute the national income through subsidies on things that 
improved the earning power of citizens, such as education. Housing and 
public health were also obviously desirable. But finding the correct solu­
tions for personal medical care, pensions, or retirement benefits was not 
easy. We decided each matter in a pragmatic way, always mindful of possi­
ble abuse and waste. If we over-re-distributed by higher taxation, the 
high performers would cease to strive. Our difficulty was to strike the 
right balance. 
My primary preoccupation was to give every citizen a stake in the 
country and its future. I wanted a home-owning society. I had seen the 
contrast between the blocks of low-cost rental apartments, badly misused 
and poorly maintained, and those of house-proud owners, and was con-
96 From Third World to First 
vinced that if every family owned its home, the country would be more 
stable. After we won the general election in September 1963, while 
Singapore was in Malaysia, I had the Housing and Development Board 
(HDB) announce a home ownership scheme. We had set up the HDB in 
1960 as a statutory authority to build low-cost housing for workers. The 
HDB offered buyers housing loans in 1964, at a low interest rate with 
repayment periods of up to 15 years, but the scheme did not take off. 
Prospective buyers could not raise the down payment of 20 percent of the 
selling price. 
After independence in 1965, I was troubled by Singapore 's com­
pletely urban electorate. I had seen how voters in capital cities always 
tended to vote against the government of the day and was determined 
that our householders should become home owners, otherwise we would 
not have political stability. My other important motive was to give all 
parents whose sons would have to do national service a stake in the 
Singapore their sons had to defend. If the soldier's family did not own 
their home, he would soon conclude he would be fighting to protect the 
properties of the wealthy. I believed this sense of ownership was vital for 
our new society which had no deep roots in a common historical experi­
ence. On this, Keng Swee as defense minister was my strongest supporter. 
Other ministers thought home ownership desirable but not that vital. 
The colonial government had started the Central Provident Fund 
(CPF) as a simple savings scheme for retirement: 5 percent of wages con­
tributed by the employee with a matching 5 percent by the employer, to 
be withdrawn at age 55. As a pension scheme it was inadequa te. Keng 
Swee and I decided to expand this compulsory savings scheme into a fund 
that would enable every worker to own a home. In 1968, after we passed 
an amendment to the CPF Act to raise the rate of contribution , the HOB 
launched a revised home ownership scheme. Workers were allowed to use 
their accumulated CPF savings to pay the 20 percent down payment and 
service the housing loan for the balance by monthly installments over 20 
years. 
I had earlier discussed my plan with NTUC leaders. Because they 
placed their confidence in me, I felt I had to overcome all difficulties to 
fulfill my promise to the unions that every worker would be given the 
opportunity to own a home. I therefore gave this scheme my constant 
A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 97 
attention, making adjustments from time to time as market conditions 
affected wages, construct ion costs, and the price of land. Every year, the 
National Wages Council recommended an increase in wages based on the 
previous year's economic growth. Once workers got used to a higher take­
home pay, I knew they would resist any increase in their CPF contribu­
tion that would reduce their spendable money. So, almost yearly I 
increased the rate of CPF contributions, but such that there was still a net 
increase in take-home pay. It was painless for the workers and kept infla­
tion down. This was only made possible by high growth year after year. 
And because the government fulfilled its promise of fair shares for work­
ers through the ownership of their homes, industrial peace prevailed. 
From 1955 to 1968, the CPF contribution had remained unchange d. 
I raised it in stages from 5 percent to a maximum of 25 percent in 1984, 
making a total savings rate of 50 percent of wages. This was later reduced 
to 40 percent. The minister for labor was usually most anxious to have 
the worker's take-home pay increased and would urge me to put less into 
the CPF. I regularly overruled him. I was determined to avoid placing the 
burden of the present generation's welfare costs onto the next generation. 
In 1961, a big fire completely destroyed a squatter settlement on 47 
acres of land at Bukit Ho Swee, making some 16,000 families homeless. I 
immediately amended the law to allow the government, after a fire, to 
acquire the fire site at the price without vacant possession, as if the land 
still had squatters on it. This meant, at that time, about one-third of its 
market value with vacant possession. In moving the bill, I argued, "It is 
heinous in the extreme to allow any profit to be made out of this fire. In 
fact, if any profit is allowed to be made, then it will only be an inducement, 
a temptation to arson by those who possess land with squatters on it." 
Later, I further amended the law to give the government power to 
acquire land for public purposes at its value on a date then fixed at 30 
November 1973. I saw no reason why private landowners should profit 
from an increase in land value brought about by economic development 
and the infrastructure paid for with public funds. As we became more 
prosperous, we moved the base year to January 1986, January 1992, and 
then to January 1995, closer to market rates. 
The number who wanted to buy new HOB apartments rose rapidly 
from about 3,000 in 1967 to 70,000 in 1996. More than half of these 
98 From Third World to First 
buyers in the 1990s already owned HOB homes, but wanted to upgrade 
to bigger ones. In 1996, we had $725,000 HOB apartments, out of which 
only 9 percent were rented out; the rest were owner-occup ied, ranging 
in value from $150,000 for the smallest three-room apartments to 
$450,000 for executive apartments. 
From time to time I intervened directly, as in May 1974 when I asked 
the chief executive officer to improve the quality and vary the apartment 
designs and landscaping of new towns so that they would not look so uni­
form. The architectural variations that followed gave distinctiveness and 
character to the new towns by exploiting unique site features such as 
undulating terrain and ponds. 
In the first decade from 1965, the new housing estates were sited on 
the fringes of the central area, in Tiong Bahru, Queensto wn, Toa Payoh, 
and Mac Pherson. After 197 5, they were built further afield, in then rural 
or farming areas. Following my discussions with EDB officers, I asked the 
HDB to set aside land in these estates for clean industries which could 
then tap the large pool of young women and housewives whose children 
were already schooling. This proved successful when Philips built its first 
factory in 1971 in Toa Payoh. After this, most new towns had clean air­
conditioned factories set up by MNCs producing computer peripherals 
and electronics-Hewlett-Packard, Compaq, Texas Instruments , Apple 
Computer, Motorola, Seagate, Hitachi, Mitsubishi , Aiwa, and Siemens. 
They provided over 150,000 jobs for more women than men, most living 
nearby; this helped to double or triple family incomes. 
Compressing 30 years into a few pages makes it all appear simple and 
straightforward . There were enormous problems , especially in the early 
stages when we resettled farmers and others from almost rent-free wooden 
squatter huts with no water, power, or modern sanitation, and therefore 
no utility bills, into high-rise dwellings with all these amenities but also 
a monthly bill to pay. It was a wrenching experience for them in personal, 
social, and economic terms. 
Difficult adjustments were inevitable and there were comic, even 
absurd, results. Several pig farmers could not bear to part with their pigs 
and reared them in their high-rise apartments. Some were seen coaxing 
their pigs up the stairs! One family, a couple with 12 children moving 
from a hut to a new HDB apartment at Old Airport Road, brought a 
A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 99 
dozen chickens and ducks to rear in the kitchen. The mother built a 
wooden gate at the kitchen entrance to stop them from entering the liv­
ing room. In the evenings, the children would look for earthworms and 
insects at the grass patches outdoors for feed. They did this for 10 years 
until they moved into another apartment . 
The Malays preferred to be closer to the ground. They planted vegeta­
bles around the high-rise as they used to do in their kampongs. For a long 
while, many Chinese, Malays, and Indians walked up the stairs instead of 
taking the elevators, not because they wanted the exercise but because 
they were afraid of elevators. There were people who continued to use 
kerosene lamps instead of electric bulbs. Others carried on their old busi­
ness as before, selling cigarettes, sweets, and sundry goods from their 
front rooms on the ground floor. They all suffered from culture shock. 
Success brought new problems. Those waiting for their homes 
noticed that prices of apartments went up year by year with rising costs of 
labor and imported materials and appreciating land value. They became 
impatient and wanted their apartments as soon as possible. There was a 
limit to what we could do well. We made one of our more grievous mis­
takes in 1982-1984 by more than doubling the number of apartments we 
had previously built. I had appointed Teh Cheang Wan minister for 
national development in 1979. Before that, he had been the CEO of the 
HOB. He assured me that he could meet the demand for more homes. He 
did, but the contractors could not cope with the enlarged workload, and 
poor workmanship caused great unhappiness when defects surfaced a few 
years later. They had to be put right at considerable cost to the HDB and 
inconvenience to the owner occupants. 
I should have known that it does not pay to yield to popular pressure 
beyond our capacity to deliver. Yet I was party to a similar mistake in the 
early 1990s. As property prices rose, everybody wanted to make a profit 
on the sale of their old home and then upgrade to a new one, the biggest 
they could afford. Instead of choking off demand by charging a levy to 
reduce their windfall profits, I agreed that we accommodate the voters by 
increasing the number of homes built. That aggravated the real estate 
bubble and made it more painful when the currency crisis struck in 1997. 
Had we choked off demand earlier, in 1995, we would have been 
immensely better off. 
100 From Third World to First 
To prevent older estates from looking like slums, I suggested to the 
minister for national development in 1989 that it was time to upgrade 
old housing with public funds to make them approximate the quality of 
the new. He agreed and sent missions abroad to study how such improve­
ments could be made while the occupants remained in residence. The 
missions found examples in Germany , France, and Japan. The HOB 
started with a demonstrat ion phase for older apartments, spending 
S$58,000 per home to upgrade the estates and build additional space for a 
utility room, bathroom, or kitchen extension , but charging the owner 
only S$4,500. The facade and surroundings were refurbished to match the 
standard of the newer estates and the facilities of private condominiums , 
with covered linkways, common covered areas for social functions, and 
landscaping. The value of the upgraded homes rose substantial ly. 
Another intractable problem was health care. I was a student in Britain 
when the Labour government in 1947 implemented the National Health 
Service. Their belief that all people were equal and no one should be 
denied the best of medical services was idealistic but impractical and led 
to ballooning costs. The British National Health Service was a failure. 
American-style medical insurance schemes are expensive, with high pre­
miums because of wasteful and extravagant diagnostic tests paid for out of 
insurance. We had to find our own solution. 
The ideal of free medical services collided against the reality of 
human behavior, certainly in Singapore. My first lesson came from gov­
ernment clinics and hospitals. When doctors prescribed free antibiotics , 
patients took their tablets or capsules for two days, did not feel better, and 
threw away the balance. They then consulted private doctors, paid for 
their antibiotics, completed the course, and recovered. I decided to 
impose a charge of 50 cents for each attendance at outpatient dispensaries. 
This fee was gradually increased over the years to keep pace with rising 
incomes and inflation. 
I wrestled with the problem of preventing our health budget from 
growing out of control. In 1975, I discussed with a few cabinet colleagues 
my proposal to set aside part of each person's monthly CPF contribution 
for co-payment of that person's medical bills. Keng Swee, the deputy 
A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 101 
prime minister, supported a contribution of 2 percent for hospital charges. 
He agreed it was better than a generalized health insurance system, 
because expenses would be charged against an individual; this would pre­
vent abuse. 
Toh Chin Chye, then the minister for health, wanted the proposal 
shelved. He had just returned from China, where he had visited some hos­
pitals in Beijing, and was impressed by the excellent medical services 
which were free, providing the same treatment for all, from the highest to 
the lowest in the land. I said I did not believe they had such medical stan­
dards for everyone in Beijing, let alone for all in China. 
I decided not to make an issue of it. Instead, I asked the permanent 
secretary of the health ministry, Dr. Andrew Chew Guan Khuan, to work 
out how much of a person's CPF contribution would have to be set aside to 
enable that person to meet part of his or her health costs. He reported that 
it would require between 6 and 8 percent of a person's CPF contributi on. 
Fram 1977, I made all CPF members set aside 1 percent of their monthly 
income in a special account that could be used to co-pay medical expenses 
for themselves and their families. It was gradually increased to 6 percent. 
After the 1980 election, I put Goh Chok Tong in charge of the health 
ministry. He had been elected an MP in 1976 and was equal to the job. I 
explained my thinking on health services and gave him some research 
reports and other articles on health care costs to read. He understood what 
I wanted: good health services, with waste and costs kept in check by 
requiring co-payments from the user. Subsidies for health care were neces­
sary, but could be extremely wasteful and ruinous for the budget. 
When Medisave was implemented in 1984, each CPF "special 
account" had accumulated a tidy sum. We increased the monthly contri­
butions for the Medisave account to 6 percent of wages, with an upper 
limit of S$ l 5,000 in 1986. The limit was increased at regular intervals. 
Savings above this limit were transferred to a member's general CPF 
account which could be used for home mortgage payments or other 
investments. To reinforce family solidarity and responsibility , Medisave 
accounts could be used to pay medical costs for a member's immediate 
family: grandparents , parents, spouse, and children. 
Co-payment by patients did prevent waste. A patient in a govern­
ment hospital pays fees subsidized at rates up to 80 percent, depending on 
102 From Third World to First 
the type of ward he or she chooses. As incomes increased, fewer patients 
chose the lower-cost wards, which had the highest government subsidies, 
and opted for wards with more comfort but lower subsidies. We consid­
ered but rejected a means test to determine which wards patients were 
entitled to use; it would have been difficult to implement. Instead we 
encouraged people to upgrade to the ward they could afford by making 
clear differences in comfort between different types of wards. It was in 
effect a self-administered means test. Rising incomes resulting in high 
Medisave savings made people feel wealthy enough to choose the better­
fitted wards. 
We allowed the use of Medisave for private hospital fees, subject to 
price limits for various procedures. This competition put pressure on gov­
ernment hospitals to improve their service quality. But we disallowed the 
use of Medisave for visits to outpatient clinics or private GPs. We 
believed more people would see a doctor unnecessarily for minor ailments 
if they could pay from Medisave than if they had to pay from their 
monthly budget. 
In 1990, we added MediShie ld, an optional insurance against the cost 
of catastrophic illnesses. Premiums could be paid out of the Medisave 
account. In 1993, we set up Medifund with money from government rev­
enue to cover those who had exhausted their Medisave and MediShield 
and had no immediate family to rely on. They could apply for a total 
waiver of all fees which would then be paid from Medifund. Thus, while 
no one is deprived of essential medical care, we do not have a massive 
drain on resources, nor long queues waiting for operations. 
A universal problem we had to resolve was retirement benefits or pensions 
when a worker became too old to work. In Europe and America, the gov­
ernment provided these pensions, paid for by taxpayers. We decided that 
all workers should accumulate their own savings in the CPF for old age. 
In 1978, we allowed the CPF to be used as a personal savings fund for 
investments. Early that year the government had revamped Singapore's 
bus services. We then formed the Singapore Bus Services (SBS), listed it 
on the stock exchange, and allowed members to use up to S$5,000 of 
their CPF to buy SBS shares on its first listing. I wanted it to have the 
A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 103 
widest share ownership so that profits would go back to the workers, the 
regular users of public transport. There would also be less incentive to 
demand cheaper bus fares and government subsidies for public transport. 
After this success, we liberalized the use of the CPF to allow invest­
ment in private, commercial, and industrial properties, trustee shares, 
unit trusts or mutual funds, and gold. If their investments outperformed 
the CPF interest rate, they could take the surplus out of the CPF. We had 
safeguards to prevent members from losing all their savings. By 1997, 1.5 
million CPF members had invested in stocks and shares, mostly blue 
chips on the main board of the Stock Exchange of Singapore. 
When we floated Singapore Telecom in 1993, we sold a large portion 
of its shares at half their market value to all adult citizens. We did this to 
redistribute part of the surpluses the government had accumulated over the 
years of our steady growth. We wanted our people to hold shares in a major 
Singapore company and have a tangible stake in the country's success. 
To discourage "stagging, " the immediate sale for cash gains, which 
happened when the British privatized British Telecom, we offered share­
holders the right to bonus shares after the first, second, fourth, and sixth 
years, provided they had not sold the original shares. This resulted in 90 
percent of the workforce owning Singapore Telecom shares, probably the 
highest in the world. 
After observing how differently people maintained their own apart­
ments as against rented ones, I believed that a deep sense of property was 
instinctive in a person. During the riots of the 1950s and early 1960s, 
people would join in the rioting, stone windshields, overturn cars, and 
burn them. When riots broke out in the mid-l 960s, after they owned 
homes and property, they acted differently. I saw young men carrying 
their scooters parked on the roads to safety up the stairs of their HOB 
blocks. I was strengthened in my resolve to give every family solid assets 
which I was confident they would protect and defend, especially their 
home. I was not wrong. 
We chose to redistribute wealth by asset enhancement, not by subsi­
dies for consumption. Those who are not winners of top prizes in the free 
market will still get valuable consolation prizes for competing in the 
marathon of life. Those who want to spend can sell some of their assets. 
Significantly, few have consumed their assets. Instead they have invested 
104 From Third World to First 
and increased their assets, spending only the derived income. They want 
to conserve their capital for a rainy day, and later leave it to their children 
and grandchildren . 
The CPF grew from 420,000 members in 1965, to over 2.8 million 
members worth S$85 billion in 1998, excluding S$80 billion withdrawn 
to pay for HDB homes, private properties , and investments in shares. 
Almost every worker carries his or her own pension fund. At his or her 
death, the balance of a worker's CPF savings will be paid according to the 
worker's written wishes without the delays and formality of applying to 
court. 
Watching the ever-increasing costs of the welfare state in Britain and 
Sweden, we decided to avoid this debilitating system. We noted by the 
1970s that when governments undertook primary responsibility for the 
basic duties of the head of a family, the drive in people weakened. Welfare 
undermined self-reliance. People did not have to work for their families' 
well-being. The handout became a way of life. The downward spiral was 
relentless as motivation and productivity went down. People lost the 
drive to achieve because they paid too much in taxes. They became depen­
dent on the state for their basic needs. 
We thought it best to reinforce the Confucian tradition that a man is 
responsible for his family-his parents, wife, and children. We used to 
face frequent criticism and attacks from opposition parties and the 
Western media, through their correspondents in Singapore, for pursuing 
such hard-hearted policies and refusing subsidies for consumption . It was 
difficult to counter the seductiveness of welfare promises by the opposi­
tion during elections. In the 1960s and 1970s, the failure of the European 
welfare state was not yet self-evide nt. It took two generations for the 
harm to work its way through and be seen in lowered performance of 
individuals, sluggish growth rates, and growing budget deficits. We 
needed time to build up substantial CPF savings, and have many own 
their homes. Only then would people not want their individual savings 
put into a common pool for everyone to have the same welfare "entitle­
ment," own the same kind of home, or enjoy the same level of comfort in 
hospitals . I was certain they would prefer to make that additional effort to 
A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 105 
pay for the extras they sought, either in the size and quality of their 
homes or in the level of comfort in hospitals. It was fortunate that I was 
able to withstand these criticisms in successive elections until the 1980s, 
when the failure of the welfare state was acknowledged by the Western 
media. 
The CPF has made for a different society. People who have substantial 
savings and assets have a different attitude to life. They are more con­
scious of their strength and take responsibility for themselves and their 
families. They are not attracted to the "buffet syndrome" where, after pay­
ing a health insurance premium, you consume as much in medical inves­
tigations and procedures as you or your doctor can think of. 
To ensure a member's savings will be enough for his retirement, nei­
ther his CPF balance nor his assets bought with CPF money can be levied 
upon or attached for any debt or claim. Nor is his HDB apartment 
bought with CPF money available to his creditors. Only the HDB can 
execute against an owner for mortgage installments unpaid on the home. 
The CPF has provided workers with a comprehensive self-financing 
social security fund equal to any old-age pension system or entitlement 
program, without shifting the burden to the next generation of workers. 
It is fairer and sounder to have each generation pay for itself and each per­
son save for his own pension fund. 
The CPF and home ownership have ensured political stability, the 
foundation upon which Singapore grew and developed without interrup­
tion for more than 30 years. Singaporeans are unlike their counterparts in 
Hong Kong, Taipei, Seoul, or Tokyo, who have high wages but pay vast 
rents for tiny rooms which they will never own. Such an electorate would 
not have reelected the PAP with solid majorities in successive elections. 
To work a social security system like the CPF, an economy needs to 
have low inflation and interest rates above inflation rates. People must be 
confident their savings will not melt away through inflation or devalua­
tion against other currencies. In other words, sound fiscal and budget 
policies are the preconditions for the success of the CPF. 
If we had not redistributed the wealth generated by our people competing 
in a free-market economy, we would have weakened Singaporeans' sense 
106 From Third World to First 
of solidarity , the feeling that they are one people sharing a common des­
tiny. I can best explain the need for balance between individual competi­
tion and group solidarity by using the metaphor of the oriental yin and 
yang symbol, two fishlike shapes forming a circle. Yin represents the 
female element; yang, the male. The more yang (male) competitiveness in 
society, the higher the total performance. If winner takes all, competition 
will be keen, but group solidarity weak. The more yin (female) solidarity, 
with rewards evenly redistributed , the greater the group solidarity, but 
the weaker the total performance because of reduced competition. 
In Singapore's Asian society, parents want their children to have a 
better start in life than they themselves had. Because nearly all Singa­
poreans are of immigrant stock, their desire for security, especially for 
their children, is intense. Owning assets, instead of subsisting on welfare, 
has given people the power and the responsibility to decide what they 
want to spend their money on. 
There will always be the irresponsible or the incapable, some 5 per­
cent of our population. They will run through any asset, whether a house 
or shares. We try hard to make them as independent as possible and not 
end up in welfare homes. More important, we try to rescue their children 
from repeating the feckless ways of their parents. We have arranged help 
but in such a way that only those who have no other choice will seek it. 
This is the opposite of attitudes in the West, where liberals actively 
encourage people to demand their entitlements with no sense of shame, 
causing an explosion of welfare costs. 
Our policies kept people keen to achieve their best. Monetary stabil­
ity, a balanced budget, and low taxes encouraged ample investments and 
high productivit y. On top of their high CPF compulsory savings of 40 
percent of their wages, many have additional voluntary savings in the 
Post Office Savings Bank, later called POSBank. All these helped the 
government to pay for infrastructu re: roads, bridges, airports, container 
ports, power stations, reservoirs , and a mass rapid transit system. By 
avoiding wasteful expenditu re, we kept inflation low and did not need to 
borrow foreign funds. Since the 1960s, we had annual budget surpluses , 
except for the years 1985 to 1987, when we were in recession. Govern­
ment expenditure has averaged 20 percent of GDP, compared to an aver­
age of 33 percent in the G7 economies. On the other hand, our develop-
A Fair, Not Welfare, Society 107 
ment expenditure has consistently been much higher than that of the G7 
countries. 
We aimed in most years to raise sufficient revenue to finance both 
operating and development expenditure, and also to be internationally 
competitive in our tax structure. In 1984, direct taxes accounted for two­
thirds of our total tax revenue. We progressively reduced income tax, both 
personal and corporate , until direct taxes in 1996 made up about half of 
total tax revenue, compared to three-quarters in the G7 economies. We 
moved from taxing income to taxing consumption. The top marginal 
income tax rate for individuals was reduced from 55 percent in 1965 to 
28 percent in 1996. The corporate tax rate of 40 percent was reduced to 
26 percent in the same period. Singapore has no capital gains tax. Our 
GST (goods and services tax, the equivalent of VAT) is 3 percent. Our 
import tariff is about 0.4 percent. 
Initially we had punishing rates of estate duty, based on the British 
socialist philosophy of soaking the rich. But good tax lawyers and accoun­
tants left little for the tax collector. In 1984, we cut estate duty from a 
maximum of 60 percent to between 5 percent and 10 percent, depending 
on the value of the estate. We collected more revenue as the wealthy no 
longer found it worthwhile to avoid estate duty. We have nontax revenue 
from a wide range of user charges. Our aim is to have partial or total cost 
recovery for goods and services provided by the state. This checks over­
consumption of subsidized public services and reduces distortions in the 
allocation of resources. 
Sustained growth ensures stability, which encourages investments 
that create wealth. Because we made the difficult decisions early, we have 
established a virtuous cycle-low expenditure, high savings; low welfare, 
high investments. We have accumulated assets during the last 30 years of 
strong growth with a relatively youthful workforce. In the next 20 years, 
our economic growth will slow down as our population ages. Private sav­
ings rates will decline, and health care costs will rise sharply with more 
old people, just when taxpayers as a percentage of the population will 
decrease. We can partly meet this problem by taking steps early to ensure 
the old will have larger Medisave savings; the better answer is to attract 
educated and skilled immigrants to enlarge our talent pool and increase 
both GDP and revenue. The government must give increased financial 
108 From Third World to First 
and administrativ e support to more community welfare projects, as many 
as there are social volunteers to drive and supervise them. 
All this fine-tuning to rev up the economy would never have been 
possible had the communists retained their baleful influence. Instead 
their open-front leaders fumbled and faltered after Singapore became 
independent in 1965. They removed themselves from the constitutional 
arena and left the PAP to set the agenda. We seized the opportunity and 
reshaped the politics of Singapore. 
8. The Commun ists Self-Destruct 
On the morning of 17 November 1965, the superintendent of Changi 
Prison noticed that Lim Chin Siong, who normally greeted him, was 
strangely silent. The leader of the communist united front in the 1950s 
and 1960s, and once PAP member of the Legislative Assembly, had been 
detained since a 1963 security operation . Lim was trembling. His clothes 
were dishevelled , his trousers torn, and he appeared to have been in a 
fight. He wanted to be transferred to another part of the prison. His fel­
low detainees asked and were allowed to interview Lim in the superinten­
dent's presence. Looking upset, Lim muttered , "They will beat me up, 
they will poison ... I will finish myself or they will. ... Ideological dif­
ferences." He again asked to be moved and was transferred to another sec­
tion of the prison. 
He was taken ill the next day and was brought first to the prison hos­
pital, then to the General Hospital. At about 3:00 A.M. a detective saw 
him near a medical trolley looking for something. Questioned , he replied 
he was looking for a knife. At 6: 15 A.M. Lim got up and went to the toi­
let. A warder and a detective waited outside. When Lim did not come out 
after 3 minutes, they knocked on the door. There was no response. The 
warder looked into the toilet from an adjacent one and saw Lim hanging 
from a cistern. He kicked the door open, rushed in and lowered him. Lim 
had used his pyjamas to hang himself. The doctors resuscitated him. 
The communists in detention were confused and divided by the 
reverses they had suffered: first, their setback in Septembe r 1962 when 
110 From Third World to First 
they lost the referendum on merger with Malaysia, and second, their defeat 
in the September 1963 elections. The Barisan Sosialis, their united-front 
party, won only 13 out of 51 seats and 3 3 percent of the votes and emerged 
as the second largest party. When Singapore was separated from Malaysia, 
Dr. Lee Siew Choh, the Barisan Sosialis chairman , denounced Singapore's 
independence as "phoney." He had lost his seat in the 1963 election and 
was not a member of Parliament when it met in December 1965. On 
behalf of the Barisan MPs, he declared that they would boycott Parlia­
ment. A short while later he announced that they would abandon constitu­
tional politics and "take the battle to the streets." He was imitating the 
madness of the Cultural Revolution in China gleaned from Radio Beijing 
broadcasts. As Red Guards took to the streets in China, he ordered his 
Barisan cohorts to mount demonstrations at hawker centers and mobile 
night bazaars (pasar ma/am), and wherever there were crowds. Like the Red 
Guards, they too carried banners and placards and clashed with the police. 
The police broke up their assemblies and charged the demonstrators in 
court for mischief and rioting. 
Instead of winning public support, these tactics further split and 
destroyed the Barisan. On 1 January 1966, Lim Huan Boon, the Barisan 
opposition leader in Parliament, announced his resignation as MP. He 
said that Singapore was independent; the Barisan's policies were irrelevant 
and in the interests of international commun ism, not of the people. The 
following day the party expelled him. He responded that the Barisan had 
broken faith not only with the democrat ic system but also with the peo­
ple who had elected them. A week later two more Barisan MPs resigned, 
declaring that the party under Lee Siew Choh's leadership was at a dead­
end, and it was a fallacy to think that Singapore's independence was 
"phoney." Two days after that another Barisan MP, S. T. Bani, then in 
detention, resigned, renounced commun ism, and quit politics for good. 
The communist united front was in total disarray. 
Lee Siew Choh had not only rendered the communist united front 
ineffective, he had in effect surrendered the constitutional arena to the 
PAP. It was a costly mistake, one that gave the PAP unchallenged domi­
nance of Parliament for the next 30 years. 
I sensed a fundamental change in the attitudes of the people. They 
realized Singapore was on its own. The British would soon leave; the 
The Commu nists Self-Destruct 111 
Malaysians had no love for us; the Indonesians wanted to destroy us. 
Politics was now no longer a game of mass rallies and demonstrations. It 
had become a matter of life and death. All Chinese know the saying: Big 
fish eat small fish, small fish eat shrimp. Singapore was a shrimp. People 
worried over their survival. They knew only the PAP had been tried and 
tested and had the experience to lead them out of danger. 
In the Bukit Merah by-election in January 1966, the PAP won with an 
overwhelming majority of 7,000 out of 11,000 votes. The Barisan call for 
blank votes got less than 400. In succession we won six more by-elections, 
all unopposed , to fill Barisan resignatio ns, and brought in higher-quality, 
better-qualified MPs, many of them Chinese-educated Nanyang University 
graduates . They helped to move the Chinese-speaking toward the political 
center. 
In January 1968, soon after the British announced their decision to 
withdraw their forces, I called for a general election. The Barisan boycotted 
the election. It was another major mistake, one that was to keep them out 
of Parliament for good. We were returned unopposed in 51 constituencies 
and won the remaining seven with over 80 percent of valid votes cast. 
Singapore's future looked so bleak that the opposition parties abandoned 
the field to us. After winning all the seats, I set out to widen our support 
in order to straddle as broad a middle ground as possible. I intended to 
leave the opposition only the extreme left and right. We had to be careful 
not to abuse the absolute power we had been given. I was sure that if we 
remained honest and kept faith with the people, we would be able to carry 
them with us, however tough and unpalatable our policies. 
It is impossible in Singapore's political climate of the 1990s to imag­
ine the psychological grip the communists had on the Chinese-speaking 
in the Singapore and Malaya of the 1950s and 1960s. The communists 
made these people believe that what had happened in China would also 
come to pass in Malaya, that communism was the wave of the future and 
those who opposed them would be buried by history. They had then a 
hardcore following of some 20 to 30 percent of the electorate that we 
could not win over for many years, despite the economic benefits we 
brought them over the next decade. 
We had formed and shaped our political strategies and tactics during 
our struggles as the opposition party from 1954 to 1959, and in govern-
112 From Third World to First 
ment from 1959 to 1965. The skillful and tough methods of the unyield­
ing communists , followed by the equally ruthless communal methods of 
the UMNO Ultras, were unforgettable lessons in political infighting. 
Street fighting with them was like unarmed combat with no holds barred, 
in a contest where winner took all. We learned not to give hostages to our 
adversaries or they would have destroyed us. Even after we had reduced 
the communist strength in the united-front organization, their lurking 
presence in the underground had to be taken into our political calcula­
tions. At any time they could resort to violence or choose to rebuild their 
open-front organizations, or both. Weekly intelligence reports from the 
Internal Security Department made us ever mindful of their presence in 
Singapore and their secret network that linked them to armed groups in 
peninsular Malaya. 
After the Barisan became ineffective, the communists reverted to vio­
lence and terror. They reappeared as the Malayan National Liberation 
Front (MNLF), an adjunct of the Malayan Communist Party (MCP), 
exploding several bombs inJurong and Changi, two ends of Singapore, in 
the 1970s. Among those killed was the six-year-old daughter of a British 
serv1Ceman. 
By the 1970s, they had been reduced to some 2,000 guerrillas on the 
Thai side of the Thai-Malaysian border, a few hundred scattered in the 
jungles of peninsular Malaysia, and some terrorist squads in the towns. 
Could we have defeated them if we had allowed them habeas corpus and 
abjured the powers of detention without trial? I doubt it. Nobody dared 
speak out against them, let alone in open court. Thousands were held in 
detention camps in Malaya, and hundreds in Singapore. The British had 
banished thousands to China in the 1940s and 1950s. 
Among those not banished was Lim Chin Siong. The price he paid when 
communism failed him was his attempted suicide. This was recounted in 
detail by the superintendent of prisons in December 196 5 during the trial 
of two Barisan Sosialis editors of the party's Chinese-language tabloid. 
They were charged with sedition because they wrote that the "PAP 
regime" was "plotting to murder comrade Lim Chin Siong." The defense 
The Commu nists Self-Destruct 113 
brought many witnesses to give false evidence to support their absurd 
allegation that there had been a conspiracy to murder Lim at the General 
Hospital. The two editors were convicted. 
In July 1969, three and a half years after his suicide attempt, Lim 
asked to see me. I had not met him since he led the Barisan split from the 
PAP in June 1961. When he came to Sri Temasek, my official residence , 
on the evening of 23 July, he looked a disillusioned man. He had decided 
to give up politics for good and wanted to leave for studies in London. He 
would like his girlfriend and fellow detainee, a former trade union worker 
of the Singapore Factory and Shop Workers' Union in the 1950s who had 
been released earlier, to accompany him. I readily agreed and wished him 
well in his new life in London. He had wasted the best years of his life, 
ending up disgusted with his former comrades and bitter at their blink­
ered and unthinking refusal to face reality. 
In an open letter to Lee Siew Choh, he wrote, "I have completely lost 
confidence in the international communist movement ," and resigned 
from all posts in the Barisan. Lee immediately denounced Lim as a "spine­
less and barefaced renegade traitor" and expelled him from the party. 
Lim's unhappy break from the party he had founded marked the final dis­
integration of the Barisan as a political force. 
After more than a decade in Britain Lim returned to Singapore in the 
1980s. We never met again although we exchanged greetings in New 
Year cards. When he died in 1996, his former comrades forgave him. 
Although in 1969 they had denounced him as a "spineless and barefaced 
renegade traitor," hundreds of former communists and their supporters 
attended his wake. At the funeral service he was praised as "a hero of the 
people and nation." Some 500 other sympathizers held another memorial 
service in Kuala Lumpur, more to show the world that they were still 
strong and firm in their beliefs than to honor him. Lim had been the wiser 
to have acknowledged earlier than they did that communism was a lost 
cause. In an open letter of condolence to his wife, I expressed my respect 
for his personal honesty and his dedication to his cause. 
The communist battle in Singapore and Malaysia was lost years before 
the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union and well before China 
abandoned them in the 1980s. However, one communist activist held out 
114 From Third World to First 
after more than 20 years in detention , a believer who refused to give up 
even after communism collapsed worldwide-Chia Thye Poh. He was a 
determined man with stubborn if misguided convictions. Although a 
member of the MCP, he strenuously denied having any links with or sym­
pathy for communism in spite of his membership being confirmed to our 
Internal Security Department (ISO) by several MCP members , two of 
whom he directly reported to. 
He was released in 1989 to reside on Sentosa, a resort island, where he 
worked as a part-time translator, and was finally freed from all restrictions 
in 1998. He was not able to accept that his vision of the future had failed. 
He continued to deny his communist links, playing on the human rights 
sentiments of the Western media. His detention, in spite of Western 
media pressure, served to discourage other communist cadres from reacti­
vating their cause under cover of exercising their democratic rights. They 
were formidable opponents. We had to be as resolute and unyielding in 
this contest of wills. 
We were reminded from time to time that the communists never give up. 
The switch to English in our schools had dried up their supply of 
Chinese-educated recruits so they tried hard to enlist the English­
educated. Knowing how skillful, resourceful, and tenacious the commu­
nists were in their methods of infiltration and manipulation, we were 
determined that they should not be given any chance to make a comeback 
by rebuilding their front organizations , especially in the trade unions. 
Their ability to penetrate an organization with a cadre of influential 
activists and take control of it was fearsome. 
A small group of English-educated pro-Marxist activists made use of 
the Workers' Party in 1985, writing articles for the party paper, the 
Hammer, and helping to produce it from behind the scenes. They declined 
to take charge of the publication openly although requested by the party 
to do so. This put the ISO on alert. The group included some University 
of Singapore graduates associated with Tan Wah Piow, a pro-communist 
student activist who had fled to London in 1976. Others in Tan's group 
had gone to China to work for the CPM clandestine radio. The ISD con-
The Communists Self-Destruct 115 
sidered these pro-Marxist English-educated activists an incipient security 
problem and in 1987 recommended that they be detained. I accepted the 
recommendation. I did not want a couple of pro-communist cadres 
including Tan, on whom we had hard evidence of links with the CPM, to 
rebuild their influence using innocent but disaffected activists. Their new 
united front included a Roman Catholic who had given up becoming a 
priest to dabble in liberation theology. 
Because of Singapore's experience of communist infiltration and sub­
version, the ISD is always alert to any clandestine penetration of open 
organizations, especially trade unions and old boys' associations. To make 
it difficult for them to manipulate nonpolitical bodies, we require all who 
enter the political arena to form their legitimate vehicle, a political party. 
This forces them out into the open and makes them easy to monitor. In 
this way we have prevented our trade unions from being infiltrated and 
kept our social, cultural, and trade organizations free from communist 
influence. One important reason why we will not allow the remnant com­
munist cadres in Thailand to come back without squaring their accounts 
with the ISD is so they will not pass their infiltration and subversion 
skills to a younger generation of activists, now English-educated . 
The most prominent and senior communist leader we allowed to return to 
Singapore from China was Eu Chooi Yip, Keng Swee's old friend and con­
temporary in Raffles College. Keng Swee had met him on many occasions 
when he went to China in the late 1980s and was convinced he had given 
up communism. Keng Swee asked me whether I would allow Chooi Yip 
to return. I did, and in 1989 he returned to Singapore with his wife and 
two daughters. Soon after that P. V. Sharma also asked to return from 
China where he had been living after he was banished . He was a former 
president of the Singapore Teachers' Union who had been arrested in 
1951, at the same time as Devan Nair and Samad Ismail, and banished to 
India where he was born. From India, Sharma had gone to China. Sharma 
also returned with his wife and children. 
Eu Chooi Yip was the direct superior in the MCP of Fang Chuang Pi, 
the leader of the communists in Singapore whom I had met in the 1950s 
116 From Third World to First 
and named the Plen, short for "plenipotentiar y" of the communists. In 
mid-1990, Chooi Yip asked through Keng Swee if I would allow the 
Plen's son to work in Singapore. I agreed after Keng Swee assured me the 
son was not a security risk. An ISD officer interviewed the young man and 
confirmed that he was no communist. He was born in late 1965 in the 
Riau islands where his father was in hiding after leaving Singapore in 
1962. At the age of 5, he was sent to China and grew up and attended 
schools in Changsha, Hunan province, where the MCP radio station, "The 
Voice of the Malayan Revolution ," was sited. He did engineering in 
Qinghua University, one of the best in China. He and his father must 
have believed he would have a better future in Singapore than in China. 
He came to Singapore in November 1990 to take a job that Keng Swee 
had secured for him as an engineer in a government-linked company. 
Shortly after his son arrived in Singapore, the Plen sent me a letter 
through a Singapore Chinese journalist "to seek reconciliatio n." He also 
sent me a video documentary entitled Glorious Peace Settlem ent. It was typ­
ical MCP propagan da: Surrender and the laying down of arms were called 
a "glorious peace settlemen t." I watched the Plen in uniform with a red 
star cap talking to his uniformed men about the success of peace talks, 
then the CPM leader Chin Peng visiting the camp, watching a dreadful 
concert. After that, the Plen made a speech and interrupted himself to 
lead the applause. I turned off the video. 
The Plen followed up with another letter about his return to 
Singapore. I replied in March 1992 that I was no longer prime minister 
but knew the government's policy was not to deal with the CPM as a 
group. Any member of the CPM who wanted to come back to Singapore 
must cut his links with the party, make a full disclosure of his past CPM 
activities, and satisfy the Internal Security Department that he had done 
so. I added that it was on these terms that the government had allowed Eu 
Chooi Yip, his superior in the party, to return to Singapore from China. 
The Plen replied immediately to express his disappointment. He found 
this unacceptab le, and there the matter rested. His end game had come 
when the CPM formally stopped their armed insurrection by signing an 
agreement with the Malaysian government's representative in Haadyai in 
south Thailand , and the Thai government allowed him and his followers 
to reside in a "peace village" near there. 
The Commu nists Self-Destruct 117 
However, some 15 or 20 of the Plen's followers quietly returned, gave 
a full account of their past activities to our ISD, and settled down to a new 
life in a very different Singapore. Like Eu Chooi Yip, Sharma, and the 
Plen's son, they too felt they would be better off here than in China or 
Thailand. 
When I arrived in Beijing in August 1995, our ambassador handed 
me a letter from the Plen. He wanted to meet me. Our first meeting had 
been in 1958 when I was just an assemblyman. Through an emissary, he 
had asked to see me, so I met him quietly on a road next to the Legislativ e 
Assembly and took him into a committee room. He assured me his party 
supported me and wanted to work together with the PAP. I asked for evi­
dence that he was in charge of the MCP organization in Singapore. He 
said I had to take his word for it. I suggested he prove his credentials by 
getting a city councillor of the Workers' Party I believed to be a commu­
nist activist to resign. He agreed and asked for time. A few weeks later, 
the councillor resigned. It was an impressive display of his capacity to 
control his members even while he was on the run from the police. We 
met again on three other occasions before I formed the government. Our 
final meeting was on 11 May 1961, when I was already prime minister. 
He promised me support and cooperation if I gave the communists more 
room to organize. I gave him no such undertaking and he ordered his 
united-front organizations to bring down the PAP government before 
vanishing. 
That final meeting was in an unfurnished apartment in an uncom­
pleted HDB building in Whampoa, lighted only by a candle. This time I 
received him at Diaoyutai, in the VIP state guesthouse of the People's 
Republic of China, on 23 August at 9:00 P.M. I wondered whether he saw 
the irony of the situation, that he was calling on me in Beijing where I 
was the honored guest of the communist government and party that had 
been the inspiration for his life's struggle. 
It was an older and stouter Plen, no longer the gaunt features, the 
lean and hungry look of an angry, hunted revolutionary from the under­
ground. At our last meeting, he served me warm beer. On this occasion I 
offered him a choice of beer, wine, or maotai. He thanked me but said that 
for health reasons he would drink plain Chinese tea. We spoke in 
Mandarin. He complimented me on my fluency. I returned the compli-
118 From Third World to First 
ment over his command of English. He thanked me for allowing his 
son into Singapore in 1990 and letting him take a job. Choo and my prin­
cipal private secretary, Alan Chan, sat in, and the Plen agreed to my tape­
recording our conversation. 
He spoke as though his position was still that of the 1950s and 
wanted to discuss the terms on which he and his 30 or so comrades could 
return to Singapore. First he tried the friendly approach, that I had a duty 
to resolve the old problems. As the CPM and PAP had been friends, could 
they not be friends again? I said we could, but as individuals. He said 
there must be some justice for his people. It was unfair that he could not 
return to Singapore. I said he could, but he must first close his accounts 
with the ISD by demonstrating that he had cut off his links with the 
CPM. 
When the soft approach failed, he talked tough, reminding me that 
he had been responsible for my safety and had done much to protect me. I 
replied that it was a risk I had to take; his men could have killed me but 
the price would have been high. Moreover, I had been fair in giving him 
notice in a public speech to leave before Malaysia Day, September 1963, 
because after that the Malaysians would be in charge of security. 
He said the Malaysian Special Branch had invited him to return; why 
could I not be as generous as the Malaysian government ? I told him the 
obvious: The CPM could not win over its Malay mass base, unlike Singa­
pore's Chinese base. I suggested he accept the Malaysian government's 
offer. He was not amused. 
When I asked how he knew I was coming, he said it was a coinci­
dence, that he had come to see his uncle and had learned of my visit from 
television. This was most improbable. A retired official of the Chinese 
foreign ministry had given his letter to our ambassador. The Plen must 
have been told by a Chinese comrade of my visit and awaited my arrival. 
He also denied what Lim Chin Siong had already revealed to the ISD, that 
after our final meeting in 1961, he had personally met and ordered Lim to 
break up the PAP and bring down the government. 
Before leaving, he produced a camera and asked for pictures to be 
taken with my wife and me. I was happy to have a memento of the myste­
rious underground leader who from his hideout in Singapore could direct 
The Com mun ists Self-Destruct 119 
his subordinates in the open front with such total command. He had once 
inspired awe and fear in me. Shorn of the mystery and power of the under­
ground, he looked a harmless, elderly man. 
Despite ruthless methods where the ends justified the means, the commu­
nists failed, but not before destroying many who stood up against them, 
and others who after joining them decided that their cause was mistaken. 
9. Straddling the Middle Ground 
The PAP has won 10 successive general elections since 1959, a period of 
40 years. It has not gone flabby or effete. How did we do it? Between 
1959 and 1965, we had fearful clashes, first with the communists and 
then the Malay communalists. On independence , we faced dire threats, 
Indonesia confronting us and Malaysia determined to bypass us. This 
series of events forged a bond of trust between that generation of voters 
and the old guard PAP leaders. 
Our critics believed we stayed in power because we have been hard on 
our opponents. This is simplistic. If we had betrayed the people's trust, 
we would have been rejected. We led them out of the depths of despair in 
the 1960s into an era of unprecedented growth and development. We 
took advantage of the expansion in world trade and investments to move 
from Third World to First World standards in one generation. 
We had learned from our toughest adversaries , the communists. 
Present-day opposition leaders go on walkabouts to decide where they 
will do well, based on the way people respond to them at hawker centers, 
coffee shops, food courts, and supermarkets , and whether people accept 
the pamphlets they hand out. I have never believed this. From many 
unhappy encounters with my communist opponents, I learned that while 
overall sentiment and mood do matter, the crucial factors are institu­
tional and organizational networks to muster support. When we went into 
communist-dominated areas, we found ourselves frozen out. Key players 
in a constituency, including union leaders and officials of retailers' and 
122 From Third World to First 
hawkers' associations , and clan and alumni organizations, would all have 
been brought into a network by communist activists and made to feel 
part of a winning team. We could make little headway against them how­
ever hard we tried during elections. The only way we could counter their 
grip of the ground was to work on that same ground for years between 
elections. 
To compete against the self-improvement night classes at the pro­
communist unions and associations , we formed the People's Association 
(PA). We brought into the PA, as corporate members, many clan associa­
tions, chambers of commerce , recreational clubs, and arts, leisure, and 
social activity groups. They provided advice and services in more than 
a hundred community centers we set up to conduct literacy classes in 
Chinese and English, and courses in sewing, cooking, and repairing auto­
mobiles, electrical instruments, radios, and television sets. By competing 
against and outdoing the communists , we gradually won back part of the 
ground they had cultivated. 
During my constituency tours in 1962 and 1963, I had assembled 
activists in smaller towns and villages all over the island. They were the 
local leaders of various associations and clubs who constituted themselves 
as welcoming committees for their area to discuss with me and my team 
of officials road improvements, street lights, standpipes, and drains to 
alleviate flooding. After my visits, work teams would follow up, provid­
ing the funds to execute such projects. 
While in Malaysia, after the race riots in 1964, we formed "goodwill 
committees " to keep communal relations from boiling over. Committee 
members were drawn from grassroots leaders of the different communities 
in the area. 
I built on these "welcomi ng" and "goodwill" committees by co-opting 
their more active and promising members into management committees 
(MCs) of community centers and into citizens' consultative committees 
(CCCs). MCs of the community centers organized recreational, educa­
tional, and other activities. CCCs, with funds we provided, did local im­
provement projects, the smaller public works. They also raised their own 
funds to provide welfare grants and scholarships for the needy. 
Community leaders at that time were reluctant, even fearful, to iden­
tify themselves openly with a political party. They preferred to be associ-
Straddling the Middle Ground 123 
aced with the government. It was a holdover from the colonial period, 
especially during the years of the Emergency when the communists were 
active and any identification with political parties competing against the 
MCP could bring retribution. By creating semi-government institutions 
such as the MCs and CCCs we mobilized a wide spectrum of elders who 
were respected in their own communities. They worked with our MPs 
between elections, and during election time their influence and support 
flowed through into the voting, even though some of them stayed neutral 
rather than campaign actively. 
Later, as the population moved into HOB high-rise blocks, I formed 
residents' committees (RCs), each serving a precinct of 6 to 10 blocks. 
This made for closer interaction between leaders and the residents of these 
blocks. Hence, in our HOB new towns, there is a network that leads from 
the RCs to the MCs and CCCs on to the prime minister's office, the nerve 
center. Opposition leaders on walkabouts go through well-tended PAP 
ground. Naturally there are floating voters. But there is a hard core of 
local leaders who know that their PAP MP, backed by the government , 
will attend to their needs whether during or between elections. 
A turning point was the general election in 1968, soon after the 
British had announced the withdrawal of their forces. We won all seats by 
an overwhelming majority. By 1972, four years later, the people were 
relieved and happy chat we had accomplished a near miracle. In spice of 
the withdrawal of British forces, and with it the loss of 20 percent of our 
GDP and some 50,000 jobs, we had high economic growth and lower 
unemployment. American multinational companies were creating thou­
sands of jobs in electrical and electronic factories. When I called for elec­
tions in September 1972, 57 out of 65 seats were contested. We won 
them all, scoring 70 percent of the votes. 
We were to repeat this total sweep again in 1976, winning 37 seats 
uncontested and all the 38 contested seats. The standing of the PAP lead­
ership and the progress we had achieved made it difficult for the opposi­
tion. People had full confidence in the PAP leadership and were not inter­
ested in having an opposition. They wanted to get on with economic 
growth, leave their squatter huts for new homes they would buy with ris­
ing incomes from well-paid jobs, and send their children to the better 
schools we were building. The tide was rising for all. We had a fourth 
124 From Third World to First 
clean sweep in 1980-37 seats unopposed , and the remaining 38 con­
tested seats with 77.5 percent of votes cast. 
The noncommunist opposition politicians who emerged to fill the vac­
uum left by the communists were mostly opportunist types. During elec­
tions, they espoused programs that would appeal to their pro-communist 
following. But as long as they were not led by English-e ducated profes­
sionals who could lend respectab ility to a communist front, as David 
Marshall's old Workers' Party had done, they posed no danger. It was in 
this context that J. B. Jeyaretna m, a lawyer, appeared in a revived Workers' 
Party. As its candidate in the 1972 election, he advocated abolishing the 
Internal Security Act. Earlier, in the late 1960s, he had promised remerger 
with Malaya. He aspired to be Marshall's successor but was not as sharp or 
as eloquent. 
But Jeyaretnam did break the PAP's spell of unprecedented total sup­
port in a by-election in 1981, a year after the general election. Devan Nair 
had resigned his Anson seat to become the president. I left the arrange­
ments for the campaign to the new assistant secretary-general, Goh Chok 
Tong. Our candidate, a keen PAP activist, was not a good public speaker. 
I did not take part in the by-election campaign, leaving it completely to 
Goh and the younger leaders. They were confident we would win, but 
when the votes were counted on polling day, we had lost. It was quite a 
shock. I was disturbed, not by the defeat, but because I had had no signal 
from Goh that we might lose. I worried about his political sensitivity. 
James Fu, my press secretary, told me that people on the ground resented 
the overconfi dent attitude of the party leaders in the campaign. One rea­
son for the loss was obvious. A large number of Singapore port workers in 
several blocks of apartments had to be moved to make way for a container­
holding area but were not given alternative accommodat ion. The Port of 
Singapore Authority and the Housing and Development Board pushed 
this responsibility to each other. 
Jeyaretnam OBJ) was all sound and fury. He made wild allegations of 
police high-handedness and repeated every grievance disgruntled people 
channelled through him without checking the facts. That he had no prin­
cipled stand suited us, because he was unlikely to become a credible alter­
native. I decided he was useful as a sparring partner for the new MPs who 
had not gone through the fight with the communists and the UMNO 
Straddling the Middle Ground 125 
Ultras. Besides, he filled up space on the opposition side of the political 
arena and probably kept better opponents out. His weakness was his slop­
piness. He rambled on and on, his speeches apparently unprepared. When 
challenged on the detailed facts, he crumbled. 
People, however, wanted an opposition voice in Parliament. The sense 
of crisis of the 1960s and 1970s had passed. Singaporeans were now more 
confident and wanted the PAP to know that they could not be taken for 
granted. In the 1984 election, we lost two seats, to JBJ in Anson and to 
Chiam See Tong, another lawyer and the secretary-general of the Singa­
pore Democratic Party (SDP), in Potong Pasir. Chiam took a shrewder 
line than JBJ, more in tune with the sentiments of the population, that 
the PAP was doing a fair job, but could do better and should listen more 
to criticism. He improved his public standing. He and the people who 
made up the SDP were not the types to be used by the communists for 
their front activities . We treated him differently, extending him respect 
and latitude. We hoped that if he expanded, those who opposed us could 
gravitate toward a nonsubversive opposition. 
These opposition figures were unlike the formidable adversaries we 
had met in Lim Chin Siong and his comrades who were serious men, com­
mitted to their cause. Jeyaretnam was a poseur, always seeking publicity, 
good or bad. 
Without much of an opposition in Parliament, I missed a foil to project 
issues. I made up for it with a major annual speech. On a Sunday evening 
a week or so after my eve-of-National-Day telecast, I would speak at an 
indoor National Day rally of about 1,200 community leaders. It was tele­
vised live. With only notes, I would speak for one to two hours on the 
important issues of the day. But I would have read extensively on the sub­
jects days before and mulled over how to simplify my presentation. 
Television polls showed I had high viewership. I had learned how to hold 
the audience, both those at the National Theatre and over television , and 
get them to follow my thought processes. I would speak first in Malay, 
then Hokkien (later Mandarin ), and last in English, my master language. 
I had better rapport with my audience when I expressed my thoughts as 
they formed and flowed in my mind, whereas if I had a script, I could not 
126 From Third World to First 
get my message across with the same conviction and passion. This annual 
speech was an important occasion when I set out to move the people to 
work together with the government and overcome our problems. 
During election time in the 197 Os and 1980s, I spoke in the evenings 
at mass rallies in the constituenci es, and at Fullerton Square in the heat of 
the tropical sun at 1 to 2 P.M., to reach out to office workers. Sometime s 
there would be a heavy shower and I would be drenched while the crowds 
sheltered under umbrellas or took cover on the "five-foot-way " (covered 
walkway) of offices around the square. The people stayed and I carried on. 
Although wet, I never felt the cold; my adrenaline was pouring out. The 
spoken word on television made a far greater impact than the written 
script in newspapers. My dominance of the public platform was my 
strength throughout my political life. 
When dealing with the opposition, I had two preoccupations : Were they 
being used by the communists ? And was this a "black operation ," one 
funded and run by a foreign intelligence agency to cause mischief? It was 
this latter concern that led to our investigation of Francis Seow, a former 
solicitor general. The Marxist group described earlier had gained influ­
ence in the Law Society. They canvassed for him and got him elected as 
president. With Seow as president, the Law Society became politicized, 
criticizing and attacking government legislation not on professional but 
on political grounds, something it had never done as a professional orga­
nization constituted by law to maintain discipline and standards in the 
legal profession. 
Around that time, in 1987, a counsellor in the U.S. embassy (called 
Hendrickson) met Seow to encourage him to lead an opposition group at 
the next election. The ISD recommended that we detain and interrogate 
Seow to get to the bottom of the matter. I agreed. We had to put a stop to 
this foreign interference in Singapore's domestic politics and show that it 
was off-limits to all, including the United States. Under interrogatio n, 
Seow admitted in a sworn affidavit that he had been asked by Hendrick­
son to lead a group of lawyers to contest the elections against the PAP. He 
also admitted that he had been to Washington to meet Hendrickson's 
superior in the U.S. State Department, who had assured him of refuge in 
Straddling the Middle Ground 127 
America were he to run into difficulties with the government . We pub­
lished his admissions made in the sworn affidavit. Then we released Seow, 
two months before the general election. He contested but lost. He was on 
a charge for fraudulent income tax returns at that time but we gave him 
permission to travel to the United States to consult a cardiologist in New 
York and to attend a human rights conference . He did not return for his 
trial; instead his lawyers submitted several medical reports from two doc­
tors: The first, Dr. Jonathan E. Fine, who signed himself as "Executive 
Director" on letter paper headed "Physicians for Human Rights," stated 
that it was inadvisible for Seow to travel internationally; the second doc­
tor stated that Seow was unable to undertake any air travel until treated 
for his heart condition. When the prosecution produced evidence that 
Seow had made at least seven air trips from December through January, 
the court directed that Seow submit more detailed medical reports. When 
Seow failed to provide further medical reports, his lawyers, an English 
Queens Counsel (QC) and a Singapore advocate, asked the court to dis­
charge them. One doctor later admitted that in fact he had not examined 
him and that he had not renewed his medical license to practice. Seow had 
no standing at the Bar, having been disciplined by the Law Society for 
financial misconduct . What was left of his credibility in Singapore was 
destroyed. When human rights groups in America puffed him up as a 
major dissident figure, Singaporeans were not impressed. Several years 
later we learned that the U.S. government had indeed given Seow politi­
cal asylum. 
We had good reason for wanting to investigate Francis Seow. We 
knew he owed a Singapore bank some S$350,000. The loan was not 
repaid for many years. In 1986, as the date for election approached, the 
bank demanded payment. He was able to pay. Where did the money come 
from? We had seized his books to check for income tax and it was clear 
that he did not have the funds to settle this loan. He swore in an affidavit 
that it was paid by his girlfriend, or his fiancee as he called her, Mei Siah. 
She told Keng Swee in Bangkok in 1989, after Seow had fled from 
Singapore, that she was asked to lend Seow the money by a Singapore 
businessman . A CEO of a major company who kept Mei Siah as his mis­
tress for a number of years told us that she was extremely tight with 
money and would never have parted with S$350,000 for anyone, and that 
128 From Third World to First 
she still owed him more than that sum. This suggested that the money 
came from some interested agency. 
One imperative is to confront directly those who accuse me of corruption 
or misusing the power of my office. I have always met head-on all such 
allegations. At election time in many developing countries , allegations of 
bribery and corruption are standard fare and are never confronted for fear 
of greater damage if the minister who sues cannot stand up to cross­
examination in court. I proceed only after taking the opinions of counsel 
both in Singapore and in London because, should my action fail, I have 
personally to carry the heavy costs: my own lawyers' and those of my 
opponents . On the other hand, I have never been sued for defamation 
because I have not made any false defamatory statements . When I said 
something disparaging about my opponents, I had ample evidence to 
back my statements and my opponents knew that. 
My first libel action to uphold the office of prime minister was in 
1965 against Syed Ja'afar Albar, then secretary-general of UMNO. We 
were then still in Malaysia. He had said in the U tusan Mela yu, a Malay 
newspaper owned by UMNO, "The Prime Minister of Singapore, Lee 
Kuan Yew, is an agent of the communists and the Djakarta regime who 
have the evil intention to destroy Malaysia. Lee Kuan Yew has the evil 
intention to destroy Malaysia and to pit the Malays and Chinese in 
Malaysia against each other." Albar and the Utusan Mela yu had no 
defense, apologized in court, and paid my legal costs. 
I also brought actions against opposition candidates who accused me 
of corruption in election speeches. An example was in 1972 when one of 
them said in Chinese that whenever people wanted to buy or transfer their 
HDB homes, they went to Lee & Lee, the law firm where my wife was a 
senior partner. Most of these candidates were men without assets, who did 
not defend themselves and accepted bankruptcy. 
J. B. Jeyaretnam, a lawyer, was an exception. At an election rally in 
197 6 he alleged that I had procured the grant of favors to Lee & Lee and 
to my family, that I had been guilty of nepotism and corruption and was 
unfit to be prime minister. I was awarded damages and costs. Jeyaretnam 
appealed all the way to the Privy Council in London, and lost. 
Straddling the Middle Ground 129 
More than a decade later, in 1988, again at an election rally, Jeyaret­
nam insinuated that I had advised Teh Cheang Wan (a minister of 
national development) to commit suicide; that I wanted to avoid a full 
investigation into allegations of corruption because they would have dis­
credited me. He could have raised Teh's suicide two years earlier but 
waited until election time. I won damages and costs. 
I took action against an American-owned weekly based in Hong 
Kong, the Far Eastern Economic Review, and its editor Derek Davies. He 
had refused to withdraw and apologize for quoting a renegade priest, 
Edgar D'Souza, who said that the government had attacked the Catholic 
Church by detaining 16 Marxist conspirators . I went into the witness box 
and was aggressively cross-examined by the Review's QC for over two days. 
When it was the turn of the editor to reply, Derek Davies did not give 
evidence because he would have been cross-examined. Nor did he call 
D'Souza to support what he had printed. The judge found against the 
Review and its editor. 
Another case was against the International Herald Tribune ([HD, a 
newspaper owned by the New York Times and the Washington Post, for pub­
lishing on 2 August 1994 a libelous article by Philip Bowring, a colum­
nist formerly from the Far Eastern Economic Review. Bowring wrote, "In the 
Chinese case, history almost seems to consist of a battle between the cor­
poratist needs of the state and the interests of the families who operate it. 
Dynastic politics is evident in 'Communist ' China already, as in Singapore 
[my italics}, despite official commitments to bureaucratic meritocracy ." 
My son Loong had been elected to Parliament in 1984 and it was clear 
what Bowring meant. The /HT admitted in its paper that the words were 
defamatory, and meant that I was advancing the interests of the Lee fam­
ily at the expense of the corporatist needs of the state. It apologized and 
paid damages and costs. 
On 2 June 1996, the Chinese-language Yazhou Zhoukan (Asian Weekly) 
quoted a lawyer, Tang Liang Hong, alleging corruption in my purchase of 
two apartments. The weekly immediately admitted liability and paid a 
large sum in settlement. But Tang refused to apologize and retract his alle­
gation. Six months later, at a rally right at the end of the election cam­
paign, Tang aggravated the libel by saying that once he had entered 
Parliament, he would raise the same issue and that "this is their death 
130 From Third World to First 
blow." The trial judge noted that the day after the libel was published, 
Tang transferred a substantial sum of money from his wife's bank account 
to his bank account in Johar Bahru, which was out of Singapore's jurisdic­
tion, to exhaust her overdraft facility. The judge said, "It was a clear piece 
of evidence of a devious mind." As Tang had absconded from Singapore 
and did not appear at the trial, judgment was in my favor. On the appeal, 
Tang's London QC did not challenge the defamatory meaning of the 
words. The appeal was dismissed. 
My opponents waited for elections to get under way before they 
uttered their slanders, hoping to inflict maximum damage. Had I not 
sued, these allegations would have gained credence. Western liberal crit­
ics argue that my reputation is so unassailable that nobody will believe 
the outrageous things that are said about me, so I should ignore them 
magnanimously instead of suing vindictively. But outrageous statements 
are disbelieved only because they are vigorously refuted. If I failed to sue, 
that would be cited as proof that there was something in it. 
In Tang's case, my purchase of the two apartments had for a time been 
a hot political issue. Had I not sued Tang after his statements in Yazhou 
Zhoukan, in the subsequent general election he would have gone to town 
with more wild claims. By then it would have been too late to rebut him, 
and even PAP supporters would have wondered whether I had done some­
thing wrong. But because Singaporeans knew I would challenge any 
defamatory untruth, when Tang defamed me, he immediately prepared 
for its consequences by moving all his funds out of Singapore. 
There is another important reason for suing those who have defamed 
me. Since the 1950s we have established a political climate under which 
politicians have to defend any allegation of misconduct or wrongdoing . 
Opposition MPs also sued when they were defamed. Chiam See Tong 
won damages against two PAP ministers, Howe Yoon Chong and S. 
Dhanabalan, who settled the cases out of court. Jeyaretnam sued Goh 
Chok Tong, then minister for trade and industry, in 1981, but failed. He 
appealed to the Privy Council but lost. Voters have come to expect any 
allegation of impropriety or dishonesty to be challenged in the courts. 
PAP ministers have been able to command the respect of people because 
they are ready to be scrutinized and cross-examined in court for any 
alleged wrongdoing. Those who allege that my libel actions were designed 
Straddling the Middle Ground 131 
to silence the opposition do not understand how readily an allegation of 
dishonesty or corruption would be believed in a region where corruption, 
cronyism, and nepotism are still a plague. 
Some critics have alleged that our judges were compliant. The judges 
who heard these cases were senior members of the bench with their stand­
ing and reputation to uphold. Their judgments were published in the law 
reports and cited as precedents that can stand the scrutiny of over 2,000 
lawyers at the Bar, and of teachers and students at the National University 
of Singapore law faculty. 
The allegation that we use the judiciary in defamation suits to bank­
rupt our political opponents came to a head when the Internationa l Hera ld 
Tribune of 7 October 1994 carried an article by Christopher Lingle, an 
American lecturer at the National University of Singapore, attacking me: 
"Intolerant regimes in the region reveal considerable ingenuity in their 
methods of suppressing dissent .... Others are more subtle: relying upon 
a compliant judiciary to bankrupt opposition politicians ." I sued the edi­
tor, the publisher, and the writer. With the foreign media present in 
strength to give them wide publicity, both the editor and publisher, 
through their lawyers, admitted it was untrue and apologized for it. The 
court awarded damages and costs against the !HT. To avoid being cross­
examined in court, Lingle fled from Singapore when the writ was issued. 
Far from oppressing the opposition or the press that unjustly attacked 
my reputation, I have put my private and public life under close scrutiny 
whenever I appeared as a plaintiff in court. Without a clear record, it 
would have been an unnecessary hazard. Because I did this and also gave 
the damages awarded to deserving charities, I kept my standing with our 
people. 
To straddle the middle ground and win elections, we have to be in charge 
of the political agenda. This can only be done by not being beaten in the 
argument with our critics. They complain that I come down too hard on 
their arguments . But wrong ideas have to be challenged before they influ­
ence public opinion and make for problems. Those who try to be clever at 
the expense of the government should not complain if my replies are as 
sharp as their criticisms. 
132 From Third World to First 
At the same time, the PAP has sought to reach out to those outside 
the party, to a new generation of Singaporeans who are better-educated 
and informed , and who want to participate in the national debate. The 
large PAP majorities in Parliament, and the poor quality of opposition 
MPs, led the public to feel that alternative views were not being ade­
quately aired in Parliament. We changed the constitution in 1990 to pro­
vide for a small number of nonelected MPs, called Nominated MPs (or 
NMPs), to reflect independent and nonpartisan views. The scheme has 
turned out well. It has enabled non-PAP people who are of good quality 
to enter Parliament . The NMPs have played a constructive role airing 
carefully considered criticisms of government policies, and the govern­
ment has taken them seriously. One, Walter Woon, moved a private 
member's bill, which Parliament passed to become the Maintenance of 
Parents Act. 
After the 1984 election, we created a Feedback Unit to give the pub­
lic a channel to express opinions on policies through forums and feedback 
sessions. MPs with a sympathetic ear chair these meetings to solicit views, 
not to persuade people. This encouraged people to speak up. Not all con­
trary opinions led to reversals of policies, but the feedback helped the 
government to improve its policies. 
After separation from Malaysia in 1965 and as British forces started to 
withdraw in 1968, elections were referenda on the level of our support, 
not whether we would win. The percentage of votes for the PAP began to 
trend downward in the mid-1980s, mainly because the younger voters, 
whose number was increasing, had not been through the early struggles 
and were not so committed to the PAP. They wanted an opposition to 
check the PAP, to pressure the government for more concessions and to 
soften hard policies. It was bound to lead to less than adequate people get­
ting elected, as indeed happened. 
When Prime Minister Goh called general elections in 1991, the oppo­
sition changed tactics. Instead of fielding more candidates of poor ability, 
they allowed the PAP to win a majority of seats uncontested on nomina­
tion day. They knew that the people wanted some opposition MPs, but 
Straddling the Middle Ground 133 
also wanted to be sure they had a PAP government . They called it their 
by-election strategy. It worked. Low Thia Khiang of the Workers' Party, a 
Nanyang University graduate and a Teochew, won the mainly Teochew 
constituency of Hougang. He turned out to be a good grassroots leader. 
The SDP led by Chiam won three seats, becoming the largest party in the 
opposition, with Chiam the official leader of the opposition. The new SDP 
MPs were lackluster and did not measure up. Chiam was constructive and 
could have built up a sizeable political party had he been a shrewder judge 
of people. In 1992, he proudly produced a plausible young lecturer as his 
prize candidate for a by-election. Within two years, his protege had ousted 
him as the leader and forced him to form a new party. 
In the 1997 election, out of 83 seats, the PAP lost only to Low Thia 
Khiang and Chiam, who by then represented a new party. The PAP's 
share of valid votes cast rose by 4 percent to 65 percent, reversing the 
downward trend. We defeated the two SOP MPs who had won in 1991 
but had disappointed their voters. The PAP had countered the opposi­
tion's "by-election" strategy with the electoral carrot that priority for 
upgrading of public housing in a constituency would be in accord with 
the strength of voter support for the PAP in that constituency. This was 
criticized by American liberals as unfair, as if pork barrel politics did not 
exist elsewhere. 
The present PAP leaders are in the process of forging their bonds with 
a younger generation . The regional financial meltdown of 1997-1 999 
was a test for this generation that has not known hardship. Together, peo­
ple and leaders overcame the problems and emerged the stronger. This 
crisis and the periodic difficulties with Malaysia have made Singaporeans 
acutely aware of the realities of life in Southeast Asia. 
Will the political system that my colleagues and I developed work 
more or less unchanged for another generation ? I doubt it. Technology 
and globalization are changing the way people work and live. Singa­
poreans will have new work styles and lifestyles. As an international hub 
of a knowledge-based economy in the information technology age, we 
will be ever more exposed to external influences. 
Will the PAP continue to dominate Singapore's politics? How big a 
challenge will a democratic opposition pose in the future? This will 
134 From Third World to First 
depend on how PAP leaders respond to changes in the needs and aspira­
tions of a better-educated people, and to their desire for greater participa­
tion in decisions that shape their lives. Singapore's options are not that 
numerous that there will be unbridgeable differences between differing 
political views in working out solutions to our problems. 
10. Nurturing and Attracting Talent 
On the night of 14 August 1983, I dropped a bombshell in my annual 
National Day Rally address. Live on both our television channels, with 
maximum viewership , I said it was stupid for our graduate men to choose 
less-educated and less-intelligent wives if they wanted their children to 
do as well as they had done. The press named it the "Great Marriage 
Debate." As I had expected, the speech stirred a hornet's nest. My wife 
Choo had warned me there were many more women with only O levels 
(an equivalent to a high school education) than women with university 
degrees. It caused a drop of 12 percentage points in votes for the PAP in 
the election the following year, more than I had anticipated. 
It had taken me some time to see the obvious, that talent is a coun­
try's most precious asset. For a small resource-poor country like 
Singapore, with 2 million people at independence in 1965, it is the defin­
ing factor. The Chinese here were mostly the descendants of agricultural 
laborers from the southern provinces of China, many brought in by labor 
contractors as indentured workers to do heavy manual work such as load­
ing and unloading cargo and pulling rickshaws. Early Indian immigrants 
also came as indentured laborers to work on rubber estates, build roads, 
and dig trenches and drains. Most were from the lower castes. There were 
small groups of Indian merchants and clerks. The ablest were Sindhi mer­
chants and Hindu Brahmins, in particular their priests. Their descendants 
have high ability. Malays as a rule were better in the arts than the sci­
ences. 
136 From Third World to First 
It was our good fortune that under the British, Singapore had been 
the regional center for education, with good schools, training for teachers, 
King Edward VII Medical College, and Raffles College (teaching arts and 
science). These two colleges, both of a high standard, were later merged to 
form the University of Malaya in Singapore. The brightest of the English­
educated students in Malaya and the Borneo territories studied at 
Singapore institutions , staying in boarding schools run by the Christian 
missions. The best students trained in Singapore as doctors, teachers, and 
administrators . They were the cream of some 6 million Chinese and 
Indians from Malaya, the Borneo territories , and even the Dutch East 
Indies, which later became Indonesia. Singapore also had the best Chinese 
schools in the region, and successful Chinese parents in the region sent 
their sons here for schooling and later to Nanyang University, when it was 
teaching in Chinese. Until the Japanese Occupation and the rise of inde­
pendent governments after the war, the Chinese moved freely between the 
countries of Nanyang (South Seas or Southeast Asia). Many stayed on for 
the better jobs. They added an extra layer of talent. 
After several years in government I realized that the more talented 
people I had as ministers, administrators , and professionals, the more 
effective my policies were, and the better the results. My mind flashed 
back to Prince Sihanouk. He was talented. When he made his films, he 
had to be author, scriptwriter, director, actor, and producer. Cambodia did 
not have enough educated and talented people and the few they had, Pol 
Pot later killed. That was one reason for the tragedy in Cambodia. 
What made me decide to make that Great Marriage Debate speech 
was a report on my desk analyzing the 1980 census figures. It showed that 
our brightest women were not marrying and would not be represented in 
the next generatio n. The implications were grave. Our best women were 
not reproducing themselves because men who were their educational 
equals did not want to marry them. About half of our university gradu­
ates were women; nearly two-thirds of them were unmarried. The Asian 
man, whether Chinese, Indian, or Malay, preferred to have a wife with less 
education than himself. Only 38 percent of graduate men were married to 
graduate women in 1983. 
This lopsided marriage and procreation pattern could not be allowed 
to remain unmentioned and unchecked . I decided to shock the young 
Nurturing and Attracting Talent 137 
men out of their stupid, old-fashioned, and damaging prejudices. I 
quoted studies of identical twins done in Minnesota in the 1980s which 
showed that these twins were similar in so many respects. Although they 
had been brought up separately and in different countries, about 80 per­
cent of their vocabulary , IQ, habits, likes, and dislikes in food and friends, 
and other character and personality traits were identical. In other words, 
nearly 80 percent of a person's makeup is from nature, and about 20 per­
cent the result of nurture. 
The capabilities of most children were between those of their two par­
ents, with a few having lower or higher intelligence than either. 
Therefore, male graduates who married less-educated women were not 
maximizing the chances of having children who make it to university. I 
urged them to marry their educational equals, and encouraged educated 
women to have two or more children. 
Graduate women were upset that I had spotlighted their plight. 
Nongraduate women and their parents were angry with me for dissuading 
graduate men from marrying them. I was attacked in a flood of comments 
and letters to the press for being an elitist because I believed intelligence 
was inherited and not the result of education, food, and training. A pro­
fessional couple challenged my alleged assumption that low-income fami­
lies would produce less-brainy children. (I had made no such claim.) 
"Look at Lee Pan Hon, the violinist. He came out of the slums of 
Chinatown. If he hadn't been given the opportunit y, he would never have 
developed his creativity. " (Lee Pan Hon, a Chinatown kid, was talent­
spotted by Yehudi Menuhin for his school in Britain. Later he became a 
first violinist in the Manchester Orchestra.) "This whole thing smacks of 
elitism." A woman wrote, "I am an unmarried, successful professional 
woman aged 40. I have remained single because I prefer it this way. I am 
deeply insulted by the suggestion that some miserable financial incen­
tives will make me jump into bed with the first attractive man I meet and 
proceed to produce a highly talented child for the sake of Singapore's 
future." Even Toh Chin Chye, then a PAP backbencher, derided my views, 
saying that his mother never went to school, his father was a clerk with 
only secondary school education, and if he had to depend on his parents' 
educational background, he would have had no chance. 
I supported my views by releasing analyses of statistics for the past 
138 From Third World to First 
few years of the educational background of parents of the top 10 percent 
of our students in examinations at ages 12, 16, and 18. These figures left 
little doubt that the decisive factor for high performance was a pair of 
well-educated parents. I also put out 1960 and 1970 data analyses that 
showed most of our top students who won scholarships for universities 
abroad had parents who were not well-educated: storekeepers, hawkers, 
taxi drivers, and laborers. I compared them to the 1980 and 1990 data 
that revealed over 50 percent of the best 100 scholarship winners had at 
least one parent who was a professional or self-employed. The conclusion 
was obvious, that the parents of these scholarship winners of the 1960s 
and 1970s would have made it to university had they been born a genera­
tion later when education was universal and scholarsh ips, stipends, and 
study loans were freely available to bright students. 
This controversy was widely reported by the Western media. Liberal 
Western writers and commentators mocked me for my ignorance and 
prejudice. But one academic spoke up for me-R. H. Herrnstein, profes­
sor of psychology at Harvard. In an article, "IQ and Falling Birth Rates," 
in the Atlantic Mont hly of May 1989, he wrote, "In our time Prime 
Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore has said, 'Levels of competence will 
decline, our economy will falter, our administration will suffer, and soci­
ety will decline' because so many educated men are failing to find edu­
cated women to marry and are instead marrying uneducated women or 
remaining unmarried. But Lee is an exception, for few modern political 
leaders dare to talk in public about the qualitative aspect of low fertility." 
A few years later, Herrnstein coauthored The Bell Curve, which set out the 
data that showed intelligence to be inherited. 
To help ease this problem of unmarried graduate women, we set up a 
Social Development Unit (SDU) to facilitate socializing between men and 
women graduates. I personally chose Dr. Eileen Aw, a doctor at the 
National University of Singapore. Then in her late forties, she was mar­
ried to a doctor and had two children at the university. Soft-spoken and 
approachable, with a knack for putting young people at ease, she was just 
the person for the job. The SDU was initially received with disdain by 
graduates, both men and women. The international press had another 
field day ridiculing our matchmaking efforts and SOU activities, from 
Nurturing and Attracting Talent 139 
symposiums, seminars, and computer classes to cruises and Club Med 
holidays. 
The fact was that parents were alarmed at the swelling numbers of 
their graduate daughters remaining unmarried and were desperate for 
help. One night in 1985, after a reception at the lstana, Choo told me 
that the women of her generation were discussing the plight of their pro­
fessionally trained daughters and commiserating with each other. They 
lamented the passing of the age when women had marriages arranged by 
their parents with the help of professional matchmakers. When most 
women received little formal education, the bright women and the less 
bright had equal chances of being "married off' since there were no O lev­
els or university degrees to grade them. This practice of arranged mar­
riages was no longer acceptable to educated women. 
It was as much the fault of mothers of graduate sons as of the sons 
themselves. Nongraduate mothers preferred nongraduate daughters-in­
law who would be less intimidating. It was most difficult to erase this 
cultural prejudice, that a male who was not seen to be the main breadwin­
ner and head of the household was to be pitied and ridiculed. This was so 
with the Chinese, more so with the Indians, and most of all with the 
Malays. 
The same problem extended through all educational levels. A large 
number of A level (or SAT-qualified) women could not find college or A 
level men to marry. So too with O level women. Women want to marry 
up, men want to marry down. The result was that the least-educated men 
could find no women to marry, because the women who remained unmar­
ried were all better-educated and would not marry them. To complement 
the SDU, I asked the executive director of the People's Association to 
form a Social Development Section (SDS) for those with secondary educa­
tion. Membership rapidly expanded and by 1995 was 97,000. Thirty-one 
percent of SDS members who met through its activities got married. 
Traditional methods of choosing marriage partners had been ruptured by 
universal education: The government had to provide alternatives to the 
family matchmakers of old. 
The 1980 census figures also revealed that better-educated women 
had compounded our problem by having much fewer children than the 
140 From Third World to First 
less-educated. The tertiary-educated had 1.6, the secondary-educated, 
also 1.6, the primary-educated, 2.3, and the unschooled, 4.4. To replace 
themselves, parents must have 2.1 children. We were more than doubling 
our less-educated, and not replacing our better-educated. 
To reverse this reproductive trend, Keng Swee, then minister for edu­
cation, and I decided in 1984 to give to graduate mothers who have a 
third child priority in choosing the best schools for all their three chil­
dren, a much-prized objective of all parents. It was a sensitive and divisive 
issue. The egalitarians in cabinet led by Raja were outraged. He disputed 
that brighter parents had brighter children. Even if it were true, he 
argued, why should we hurt people's self-esteem ? Eddie Barker was 
unhappy not because he agreed with Raja, but because it was offensive to 
less-bright parents and their children. The younger ministers were 
divided between these three views of their older colleagues. Keng Swee, 
ever the hard-headed realist, agreed with me that we had to jolt male 
graduates from their outdated cultural prejudices into recognizing the 
folly of marrying down. We carried a majority in cabinet. 
Keng Swee and I had expected nongraduate mothers to be angry 
because they would be discriminated against. Instead, we were taken 
aback when graduate mothers protested. They did not want this privi­
lege. However, the message to young men did sink in: More married their 
equals though the progress was slow. After the elections, I agreed that 
limy Tan, who had taken over from Keng Swee as the new minister for 
muation, reverse this decision and cancel the priority for graduate moth­
as. I had awakened our people, especially tertiary-educated young men 
amll· 'Women, to the starkness of our plight. But since women graduates 
�embarrassed by this privilege, it was best to remove it . 
.lm its place, I gave special income tax concessions to married 
Wllllllllren-this time to graduate, polytechnic, A level, and O level moth­
� enlarging the pool and lessening the sense of elitism. They qualified 
Im substantial income tax rebates on either their or their husband's 
iimmme for their third and fourth child. These concessions did encourage 
JllllJlll!e third and fourth births. 
Many critics blamed the government for thoughtlessly implementing 
ttflm "Stop-at-T wo" policy in the 1960s. Was it wrong? Yes and no. 
Without that policy, family planning might never have brought popula-
Nurturing and Attracting Talent 141 
tion growth down, and we would not have solved our unemployment and 
schooling problems. But we should have foreseen that the better-educated 
would have two or fewer children, and the less-educated four or more. 
Western writers on family planning had not drawn attention to this 
already familiar though less stark outcome in their own mature countries 
because it was not politically correct to do so. Had we found out on our 
own sooner, we would have refined and targeted our campaign differently, 
encouraging with incentives the better-educated women to have three or 
more children right from the start of the family planning drive in the 
1960s. Unfortunatel y, we did not know and did not change our policy 
until 1983 when analysis of the 1980 census revealed the reproductive 
patterns of the different socioeconomic groups. 
Since that speech in 1983, I have regularly released the statistical 
analysis of the educational backgrounds of parents of the top 10 percent 
of students in national examinations. Singaporeans now accept that the 
better-educated and more able the parents, the more likely are the chil­
dren to achieve similar levels. My speech was intended to shake up our 
young men and women and their parents, and make them do something 
to redress the seriousness of the situation. The open discussion it stimu­
lated made some difference. However, Keng Swee, the trained statistician, 
after studying the figures for a couple of years after my shock tactics, told 
me dolefully that we would not be able to solve this problem soon enough 
to save most of our graduate women from their fate. The figures, although 
improving, revealed it would take many years to reverse the trend. Our 
bright women would suffer, and so would Singapore. By 1997, 63 percent 
of graduate men married fellow graduates, as against 38 percent in 1982. 
Also, more graduate women were marrying nongraduates rather than 
remaining single. It is difficult to override a deep-rooted cultural bias. 
Intellectuall y, I agreed with Keng Swee that overcoming this cultural lag 
would be a slow adjustment process, but emotionally I could not accept 
that we could not jolt the men out of their prejudices sooner. 
Difficulties over our talent pool were aggravated when the rich 
Western countries changed their policies on Asian immigration. In the 
1960s, when the United States was fighting the war in Vietnam, it did 
not want to be seen as anti-Asian. It decided to accept Asian immigrants, 
reversing more than a century of its whites-only policy. Canada, Australia , 
142 From Third World to First 
and New Zealand, the big countries with small populations, soon fol­
lowed suit. They had long barred Asian immigration. When they 
changed their rules to admit better-qualified Asians, we lost a large part 
of the inflow of Chinese and Indians from Malaysia. Many middle-cl ass 
professional Chinese and Indian Malaysians migrated permanently to 
Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. Fewer foreigners also came to 
Singapore for their education. They now had their own universities, and 
many could afford to study in Australia, New Zealand, Britain, the 
United States, and Canada. 
Not all leaders shared my view of the bad effects of this change in pol­
icy. When I told Malaysian Prime Minister Tun Razak in the early 1970s 
that Malaysia was suffering a brain drain, losing many well-educated 
Chinese and Indians to Australia and New Zealand, he replied, "This is 
not a 'brains drain.' It is a 'trouble drain'; it drains trouble out of 
Malaysia. " 
Our shortage of talent was aggravated from the late 1970s when some 
5 percent of our better-educated began emigrating. Too many of our 
bright students became doctors. Many emigrated because they felt they 
did not have the success their level of professionalis m deserved. Some stu­
dents who had studied in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada migrated 
there because their careers in Singapore were not advancing rapidly 
enough. Unlike Japanese or Koreans, Singaporean s were educated in 
English and faced negligible language or cultural problems when they 
settled overseas. 
To get enough talent to fill the jobs our growing economy needed, I 
set out to attract and retain talent--entrepreneurs, professionals, artistes, 
and highly skilled workers. In 1980, we formed two committees, one to 
get them placed into jobs, another to integrate them socially. With the 
help of our student counsellors in our missions in Britain, the United 
States, Australia , New Zealand, and Canada, a team of officers would 
meet promising Asian students at their universities to interest them in 
jobs in Singapore . We concentrated on recruiting Asian students because 
Singapore offered an Asian society with a higher standard of living and 
quality of life than their own countries, and they could assimilate easily 
into our society. This systematic search for talent worldwide brought in a 
few hundred graduates each year. It made up for the loss each year 
Nurturing and Attracting Talent 143 
through emigration of 5 to 10 percent of our better-educated to the 
industrialized countries. 
For the exceptionally bright, the committee tried to "green harvest," 
an American corporate practice of offering jobs even before graduation, on 
the basis of their performance before their final examination s. By the 
1990s, this inflow through active recruitment was three times the out­
flow. We began offering a few hundred scholarships to bright students 
from China, India, and the region in the hope that some would remain 
because of the better job opportunities; those who returned to their coun­
tries could still be useful for our companies that went abroad. 
We also set up two task forces specially to attract talent from India 
and from the region, but were more successful in attracting Indian than 
Malay talent. There were too many privileges for bumiputras and pribu­
mis (indigenous Malays and Indonesians) in their home countries for 
them to consider leaving. 
A new phenomenon is the increasing number of Caucasian men mar­
rying our women, especially the tertiary-educated. Singapore graduate 
men were fearful of marrying them bur Caucasian graduates were not. 
Many of these women were forced to emigrate by our rules that allowed a 
Singapore male citizen to bring in a foreign bride, but not the other way 
around. We gave that permission only if the foreign husband had regular 
employment. We changed this policy in January 1999: This will add co 
the cosmopolitan character of Singapore. Furthermore, quite a number of 
our men who were educated abroad have married Caucasian, Japanese, 
and other Asian girls they met at university. Their children are valuable 
additions to our talent pool. The old clear-cut barriers to interracial mar­
riage have been breached by the intermingling of people as they travel to 
and work in countries not their own. We have to change our attitudes and 
take advantage of what was once considered foreign and not assimilable 
talent. We cannot allow old prejudices to hamper our development as an 
international center for trade, industry, and services. 
Besides natural conservatism, the other problem is fear of competition 
for jobs. Both at professional and lower levels there is resistance to the 
inflow of talent. Singaporeans know that more foreign talent will create 
more jobs. But they want this to happen in some other sector, not their 
own. 
144 From Third World to First 
Without foreign talent, we would not have done as well. In my first 
cabinet of 10, I was the only one born and educated in Singapore . Keng 
Swee and Chin Chye were born in Malaya, Raja in Ceylon. Our present 
chief justice, Yong Pung How, came from Malaysia, as did our attorney 
general, Chan Sek Keong. So the list could roll on. Thousands of engi­
neers, managers, and other professionals who came from abroad have 
helped us to grow. They are the extra megabytes in Singapore's computer. 
If we do not top up with foreign talent, we will not make it into the top 
league. 
11. Many Tongues, One Language 
Both Choo and I had been educated in English-language schools. When 
we met students from China while studying in England, we became con­
scious of how deculturalized we were, almost like the Chinese students 
from the Caribbean. We felt a sense of loss at having been educated in a 
stepmother tongue, not completely accepting the values of a culture not 
our own. I felt separated from the mass of the ordinary Chinese who spoke 
dialect and Mandarin. My world of textbooks and teachers was totally 
unrelated to the world I lived in. We were like hundreds of Raffles 
College graduates, not formally tutored in their own Asian cultures, but 
not belonging to British culture either, lost between two cultures. 
Choo and I decided we should not inflict this cultural handicap on 
our three children, and sent them to Chinese schools to become a part of 
this vibrant, vigorous, self-confident community, even if their English 
suffered. We remedied this by having Choo speak to them in English 
while I spoke to them in Mandarin, to improve my Mandari n! 
It turned out well for all three, educated in Chinese, imbued with the 
values that made them filial children and good citizens, and equally fluent 
in English. They did well in school, winning prizes that their schools and 
the Chinese press publicized to encourage other parents to send their chil­
dren to Chinese schools. This convinced the Chinese-speaking that I would 
not exterminate Chinese education in Singapore. Those born and bred in 
homogene ous societies may not understand why the language medium in 
which I chose to educate my children had political implications. 
146 From Third World to First 
Singapore never had one common language. It was a polyglot com­
munity under colonial rule. The British left people to decide how to edu­
cate their children. The government provided a limited number of English­
language schools to train people to be clerks, storekeepers, draftsmen, and 
such subordinate workers, and Malay-language primary schools for Malays. 
Indians ran their own Tamil and other Indian-language schools or classes. 
The Chinese set up schools financed by successful members of their com­
munity, to teach in Chinese. Because the different races were taught their 
own languages, their emotional attachment to their mother tongue was 
deep. They were like the 5 million people in Quebec tenaciously holding 
on to French in a continent of 300 million English speakers. 
When we formed the government in 1959 we decided on Malay as 
the national language, to prepare the way for merger with Malaya. We 
realized English had to be the language of the workplace and the common 
language. As an international trading community, we would not make a 
living if we used Malay, Chinese, or Tamil. With English, no race would 
have an advantage. But it was too sensitive an issue for us to make imme­
diate changes. To announce that all had to learn English when each race 
was intensely and passionately committed to its own mother tongue 
would have been disastrous. So we left the position as it was, with four 
official languages-Ma lay, Chinese (Mandarin), Tamil, and English. 
The necessity for a common language was vividly highlighted in the 
Singapore Armed Forces. We were saddled wid; a hideous collection of 
dialects and languages and faced the prospect of going into battle without 
understanding each other in any of the four official languages. Many 
could only speak dialects, requiring special Hokkien-speaking platoons. 
The Chinese were speaking one of more than seven different Chinese 
dialects at home but learning Mandarin and English in school, neither of 
which they used at home. 
Not wanting to start a controversy over language, I introduced the 
teaching of three mother tongues, Mandarin, Malay, and Tamil, into 
English schools. This was well received by all parents. To balance this, I 
introduced the teaching of English in Chinese, Malay, and Tamil schools. 
Malay and Indian parents welcomed this but increasing numbers pre­
ferred to send their children to English schools. A hard core of the Chinese­
educated did not welcome what they saw as a move to make English the 
Many Tongues, One Language 147 
common working language, and they expressed their unhappiness in the 
Chinese newspapers. 
Barely eight weeks after separation, the Chinese Chamber of Com­
merce publicly asked the government to guarantee the status of the 
Chinese language as one of the official languages in Singapore. The 
Chamber's treasurer, Kheng Chin Hock, a Chinese-language champion 
from pre-Malaysia days, stressed that Chinese was used by more than 80 
percent of the population in Singapore . I scotched this move before it 
could grow into a campaign, for once the Chinese Chamber got going, 
every Chinese school management committee and the two Chinese teach­
ers' unions would surely work up the ground. On 1 October, I restated 
that all four major languages in Singapore were official and equal. I 
reminded activists like Kheng in the Chinese Chamber that they had 
been conspicuous by their silence on language and other vital issues when 
Singapore was controlled by the Malaysian police and the Malay Regi­
ment. Five days later, under the full glare of television lights, I met the 
committees of all four chambers of commerce. I left the Chinese represen­
tatives in no doubt that I would not allow anyone to exploit the Chinese 
language as a political issue. That put an end to their attempts to elevate 
the status of the Chinese language . 
Nevertheless, opposition continued to come from students at the 
Chinese-language Nanyang University and Ngee Ann College. In October 
1966, when I declared open a library built at Nanyang University (short­
ened in Chinese to "Nantah"), 200 students protested. Several days later, 
Ngee Ann College students demonstrated outside my office and clashed 
with the police, after which they staged a sit-in at their college. After I 
deported the Malaysian leaders of the two demonstrations, student agita­
tion diminished. 
We waited patiently as year by year parents in increasing numbers 
chose to send their children to English schools, in the face of determined 
opposition from the Chinese teachers' unions, Chinese school manage­
ment committees, Chinese newspaper owners, editors, and journalists, 
leaders of clan associations, and the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. 
Every year, around the time when parents had to register their children, 
these groups would mount a campaign to get parents to enroll their chil­
dren in Chinese schools for the sake of their culture and identity. They 
148 From Third World to First 
berated those who chose English schools as money-minded and short­
sighted. 
Many Chinese-speaking parents were deeply attached to their lan­
guage and culture. They could not understand why their children were 
allowed to be educated completely in Chinese under the British, yet 
under their own elected government had also to learn English. But for 
better job prospects, many sent their children to English schools. These 
conflicting pulls provided fertile ground for agitation. 
Toward the end of 1970, the major Chinese paper, Nanyan g Siang 
Pau, turned rabidly pro-communist and pro-Chinese language and cul­
ture. It mounted an attack on the government, accusing it of trying to 
suppress Chinese language, education, and culture, and portraying me as 
the oppressor in a government of "pseudo foreigners who forget their 
ancestors." We had to arrest Lee Mau Seng, the general manager, Sham­
suddin Tung Tao Chang, the editor in chief, and Ly Singko, the senior 
editorial writer, for glamorizing communism and stirring up chauvinisti c 
sentiments over Chinese language and culture. Proof that they were doing 
so only for Singapore came from the Malaysian editions of the same paper 
that did not carry this campaign. 
Nantah graduates were another source of opposition. In both the 
1972 and 197 6 general elections they raised the issue of Chinese language 
and culture. When I tried to get the medium of instruction in Nantah 
changed from Chinese to English, Ho Juan Thai, the president of their 
students' union, instigated his fellow students to use Chinese instead of 
English in their examination papers. The university removed him from 
his post as union leader. After graduating, he contested the 1976 general 
election as a Workers' Party candidate, accusing the government of exter­
minating Chinese education and urging the Chinese-speaking to oppose 
the government or risk losing their cultural identity. He knew we would 
not act against him during the campaign. When he lost, getting only 31 
percent of the votes, he fled to London. 
The opposition to English as the one common language was unremit­
ting. The irony was that I was as keen and anxious as anyone to retain the 
best features of Chinese education. When I acted as legal adviser for the 
Chinese middle school student leaders in the 1950s, I was impressed by 
their vitality, dynamism, discipline, and social and political commitment. 
Many Tongues , One Language 149 
By contrast, I was dismayed at the apathy, self-centeredness, and lack of 
self-confidence of the English-educated students. The crux of the problem 
was that in our multiracial and multilingual society, English was the only 
acceptable neutral language, besides being the language that would make 
us relevant to the world. But it did seem to deculturalize our students and 
make them apathetic. 
However, my education in the English school system gave me one 
political advantage-it made me at home in the world of both the 
English- and the Malay-educated, and I was not confined to the Chinese­
speaking. It made it easier for me to be accepted as a leader of more than 
just the Chinese because I was perceived by the Malays and Indians as a 
Malayan (later Singaporean) nationalist, not a Chinese chauvinist. And 
because I learned Chinese later, and they saw my intense efforts to master 
both Mandarin and the Hokkien dialect, I was able to relate to the 
Chinese-educated and have them accept me as their leader. 
In the 1950s, the Chinese-educated felt a burst of pride at the resur­
gence of China and the Chinese language. The merchants in the Chinese 
Chamber of Commerce were prosperous with the rubber boom that 
resulted from the Korean War. In 1953, the chamber proposed a Chinese­
language university in Singapore for Chinese students in Southeast Asia. 
Since Chinese high school graduates were forbidden from going to com­
munist China for further studies, they believed such an institution in 
Singapore would attract many students. It drew support from Chinese 
merchants in Singapore, Malaya, and the Borneo territories. The leading 
spirit was a wealthy rubber merchant, Tan Lark Sye, who personally 
donated S$5 million, but the project involved the whole Chinese commu­
nity and generated so much spontaneous enthusiasm that taxi drivers, 
hawkers, and trishaw riders all contributed one day's earnings. When 
Nanyang University was opened by the British governor in March 1956, 
traffic crawled bumper to bumper all the way from the city to its campus 
in Jurong, 20 miles to the northwest. It became the symbol of Chinese 
language, culture, and education-a symbol the communists captured 
through their influence with sympathizers in the Chinese Chamber of 
Commerce, the clan associations, and school management committees. 
But Nantah faced problems. There were few jobs for its graduates. As 
students switched to English schools, they increasingly went to the 
150 From Third World to First 
University of Singapore, which taught in English. Better students from 
the Chinese schools took the English-language Cambridge school certifi­
cate examinations as private candidates, to be eligible for admission to the 
University of Singapore or some overseas university on a government 
scholarship. Nantah responded by lowering requirements for both admis­
sion and pass standards for graduation, further diminishing its academic 
reputation and the market value of its graduates. What finally propelled 
me to action was a report from the People's Association that when apply­
ing for jobs, Nantah graduates had produced their school certificates and 
not their Nantah degrees. 
I decided to make English the language of instruction at Nantah. 
With the unanimous agreement of the Nanyang University Council, in 
1975 I sent the minister for education, Dr. Lee Chiaw Meng, to be vice 
chancellor. He was Chinese-educated, but had a Ph.D. in engineering from 
London University . His task was to convert Nantah into an English­
language university. It proved too difficult; the staff were basically Chinese­
educated and could not teach in English. Although they had gotten their 
Ph.D.s in American universities, they had reverted to using Chinese and 
lost their English fluency. 
The situation was so bad that in 1978 our MPs who were Nantah 
graduates asked me to intervene before the university disintegrated. The 
one whose judgment I had learned to depend upon was Ch'ng Jit Koon, a 
minister of state. He had excellent interpersonal skills and had worked 
closely with me for many years, including helping to look after my con­
stituency. He convinced me that to allow Nantah to continue as it was 
would make for a bigger problem. With the careers of so many students 
blighted, the Chinese-speaking would blame the government for not 
doing more to save them, and also for allowing Nantah to collapse. Ho 
Kah Leong, Chin Harn Tong, Lee Yiok Seng, all parliamentary secretaries 
and Nantah graduates, strongly supported Ch'ng's views. 
Most of my cabinet colleagues were against intervention as politically 
too costly. Chin Chye and Eddie Barker were set against it. Even Keng 
Swee, usually robust and strong-minded, and Kim San, a pragmatist, 
were not enthusiastic. They would go along with me if I chose to inter­
vene, but why stir up a hornet's nest? They remembered our troubles with 
the Chinese schools and Nantah in the sixties. I was taken aback when 
Many Tongues, One Language 151 
Ong Pang Boon, Chinese-educated from Confucian High School, Kuala 
Lumpur, also expressed doubts. He agreed with our Nantah graduate MPs 
on the seriousness of the situation but was concerned over the political 
backlash from Nantah donors and supporters in Singapore and Malaysia. 
But I could not accept the prospect of several hundred students each year 
wasting their future. Since Nantah could not convert its teaching from 
Mandarin into English, I persuaded the Nantah council and senate mem­
bers to move the whole university-staff and students-into the campus 
of the University of Singapore. Both teachers and students would be 
forced to use English, subsumed within the larger numbers of English­
speaking staff and students at its Bukit Timah campus. 
Whatever their misgivings, Nantah staff and students were immersed 
in an English-speaking environment from the beginning of the 1978 aca­
demic year. The majority of the Chinese-speaking parents and students 
accepted this change from a Chinese-language to an English-language 
university as unavoidable. The most emotional opposition came from 
Nantah alumni. Those in Singapore understood, even if they did not 
openly support the change. The Malaysian alumni were angry and bitter 
in their denunciation of what they deemed an act of betrayal. On my part 
I was sad not to have been able to move earlier, thereby saving several 
thousand Nantah graduates from their poor economic status, handicapped 
by their inadequate command of English. 
It was a painful adjustment, more for the students than for the staff. 
University of Singapore staff took over the bulk of the teaching until 
Nantah staff revived their English fluency. I spoke to the students twice 
to sympathize with their difficulties and encourage them to persevere. 
About 70 percent of them eventually passed their final joint campus 
examinations. I had a survey conducted among the graduates, whether 
they would prefer to receive a University of Singapore degree, a Nantah 
degree, or a joint degree. The overwhelming majority wanted a Univer­
sity of Singapore degree. I decided to merge the two universities as the 
National University of Singapore (NUS) and award them NUS degrees. 
The Nantah campus became the Nanyang Technological Institute at­
tached to the NUS. In 1991, it became the Nanyang Technological 
University (NTU). Some Nantah alumni wanted it renamed Nanyang 
University. This is no longer an issue of great moment. The old name can 
152 From Third World to First 
be restored if that is the wish of the graduates of Nantah and NTU. 
Employers know that the present NTU graduates are up to standard 
whatever the name of their institution. 
I had the political strength to make those changes in Nantah because, 
unlike many champions of the Chinese language who sent their children 
to English schools, my three children were completely educated in 
Chinese schools. When I addressed students and staff of Nantah on the 
campus in the late 1960s, I could say that I never sacrificed my children's 
education for a political purpose. I was convinced that Chinese schools 
were good for them because they were able to master English at home. 
However, for their university education, I said I would not send them to a 
Chinese-language university. Their future depended upon a command of 
the language of the latest textbooks which would be in English. Every 
parent, whether Chinese-or English-educated, would come to this same 
conclusion. Because I said this at Nantah and had it reported in the press, 
I was able to influence the choice of parents and Chinese school students 
when they sought university places. 
Had my children not done well in Chinese schools, I could not have 
spoken with that same authority. Years later I asked the three of them 
whether they regretted having gone to a Chinese, not an English, school. 
They were unanimous that they were better off for having been in Chinese 
schools. 
Nantah produced a total of 12,000 graduates. Had all of them been 
educated in English, they would have had more satisfying careers and 
made bigger contributions to Singapore and Malaysia. The problem was 
one of face. Such high hopes had been pinned on Nantah at its founding, 
but the tide of history was against it. No country in Southeast Asia 
wanted a Chinese-language university. On the contrary, they were phasing 
out Chinese-language schools. Employment opportunities for Chinese­
educated high school and university graduates were rapidly declining. 
Even Chinese banks were switching to English to remain in business. 
After the two universities were merged, I made all Chinese schools switch 
to English as their main language of instruction, with Chinese as their 
Many Tongues , One Language 153 
second language. This caused soul-searching among the Chinese-educated, 
including PAP MPs. None could accept the need to reduce the teaching 
hours of Chinese in these schools, yet all agreed that the students had to 
master English to be able to continue their studies in the polytechnics 
and university without spending an extra year for remedial English. I 
sympathized with them in their dilemma, but once they accepted English 
as our working language, these consequences had to follow. 
As these changes were taking place, I feared we were losing some­
thing valuable in the Chinese school system. I wanted to preserve what 
was good in the Chinese schools: the discipline, self-confidence, and 
moral and social values they instilled in their students, based on Chinese 
traditions, values, and culture. We had to transmit these same values to 
students in the new bilingual schools or we would deculturalize them. 
When we use English as the medium of instruction, Confucian values of 
the family could not be reinforced in schools because both teachers and 
students were multiracial and the textbooks were not in Chinese. 
In addition, the traditional moral values of our students were being 
eroded by increasing exposure to the Western media, interaction with for­
eign tourists in Singapore, and their own overseas travel. The values of 
America's consumer society were permeating Singapore faster than the 
rest of the region because of our education in the English language. 
The changed values and attitudes of younger teachers compounded 
this problem. The older generation of teachers had known hardship and 
had seen how difficult it was to bring stability and harmony to Singa­
pore's multiracial society. As I wrote to Keng Swee when he took over the 
education ministry in 1979, "They teach a philosophy of life, imbue 
their students with a sense of determination, duty and responsibi lity, and 
their teachers have got greater drive and thrust than the majority of the 
English-medium teachers." The younger teachers, all educated in English 
with Chinese as their second language, were no longer as steeped in these 
traditional values. 
We wanted to preserve the distinctive traditional values of our differ­
ent cultures. The Japanese have been able to absorb American influence 
and remain basically Japanese. Their young, having grown up in afflu­
ence, appear less dedicated to the companies they work for than their par-
154 From Third World to First 
ents, but they are essentially Japanese and more hardworking and com­
mitted to the greater good of their society than Europeans or Americans. I 
believed that if the Japanese could do this, so could we. 
I decided to preserve the best nine of the Chinese schools under a spe­
cial assistance plan, or SAP. These SAP schools would admit students in 
the top 10 percent passing the primary school leaving examination. They 
would teach Chinese at the first language level but have English as the 
medium of instruction as in other schools. We provided them with addi­
tional teachers to enable the pupils to learn English and Chinese through 
special immersion programs. The SAP schools succeeded in retaining the 
formality , discipline, and social courtesies of traditional Chinese schools. 
The ethos in these schools was, and still is, superior to that of the English­
language schools, which tended to be more slack in these matters. Today 
most SAP schools, including the once communist-controlled Chinese 
High School, are premier institutions with modern facilities to match 
their proud history and traditions. 
After the Nanyang and Singapore University joint campus solution in 
1978, I decided the time was right to encourage our Chinese to use 
Mandarin instead of dialects. It would make it easier for students to mas­
ter English and Mandarin in school if they spoke Mandarin at home and 
were not burdened by dialects. I launched a "speak Mandarin" campaign 
for a month every year. 
To emphasize the importance of Mandarin, I stopped making 
speeches in Hokkien. We stopped all dialect programs on television and 
radio, but for the older generation , we still broadcast the news in dialects. 
Unfortunately, at election time we had to speak in dialects, or opposition 
candidates would have an advantage. As late as the run-up to the January 
1997 general election, some of the most rousing responses were to 
speeches in Hokkien. Dialects are the real mother tongues for the older 
generation . 
It was difficult to change the language habits of Chinese families that 
interfered with the learning of Mandarin. Until the 1970s, about 80 per­
cent still spoke dialect at home. Young workers interviewed on television 
Many Tongues, One Language 155 
were not fluent in Mandarin because they reverted to dialect at home and 
in their workplace. I used my standing with the people to persuade them 
to make the switch. They knew that my three children had mastered 
Mandarin, English, and Malay and respected my views on how to educate 
children. During our walks in public parks and gardens, parents would 
often be talking to their children in dialect until they noticed Choo and 
me, when they would look embarrassed and switch to Mandarin, abashed 
for not heeding my advice. The switch was especially difficult for the 
grandparents, but most managed speaking to their grandchildren in 
dialect and understanding their replies in Mandarin. Without this active 
promotion of Mandarin, our bilingual policy would have failed for 
Chinese students. Mandarin-speaking families increased from 26 percent 
in 1980 to over 60 percent in 1990, and are still increasing. However, 
English-speaking homes increased from 20 percent in 1988 to 40 percent 
in 1998. 
The opening of China brought a decisive change in the attitudes of 
Chinese to learning Mandarin. Professionals and supervisors who knew 
both English and Mandarin commanded a premium: There were no more 
grumbles about speaking Mandarin and not dialects. We had made the 
right decision in 1965 at independence to teach Mandarin as a second 
language. The seven different major south Chinese dialects spoken in 
Singapore made it easier to persuade all to convert to Mandarin. Had we 
been like Hong Kong with 95 percent speaking Cantonese, it would have 
been difficult if not impossible. For many Chinese Singaporeans, dialect is 
the real mother tongue and Mandarin a stepmother tongue. However, in 
another two generations, Mandarin can become their mother tongue. 
Bilingualism in English and Malay, Chinese, or Tamil is a heavy load 
for our children. The three mother tongues are completely unrelated to 
English. But if we were monolingual in our mother tongues, we would 
not make a living. Becoming monolingual in English would have been a 
setback. We would have lost our cultural identity, that quiet confidence 
about ourselves and our place in the world. In any case, we could not have 
persuaded our people to give up their mother tongues. 
Hence, in spite of the criticism from many quarters that our people 
have mastered neither language, it is our best way forward. English as our 
156 From Third World to First 
working language has prevented conflicts arising between our different 
races and given us a competitive advantage because it is the international 
language of business and diplomacy, of science and technology. Without 
it, we would not have many of the world's multinationals and over 200 of 
the world's top banks in Singapore. Nor would our people have taken so 
readily to computers and the Internet. 
12. Keeping the Government Clean 
When the PAP government took office in 1959, we set out to have a clean 
administration. We were sickened by the greed, corruption, and deca­
dence of many Asian leaders. Fighters for freedom for their oppressed peo­
ples had become plunderers of their wealth. Their societies slid backward. 
We were swept up by the wave of revolution in Asia, determined to get 
rid of colonial rule, but angry at and ashamed of the Asian nationalist 
leaders whose failure to live up to their ideals had disillusioned us. 
In England after the war, I met students from China whose burning 
ambition was to rid China of the corruption and incompetence of the 
Nationalist Chinese leaders. Hyperinflation and wholesale looting had led 
to their ignominious defeat and retreat to Taiwan. It was disgust with the 
venality, greed, and immorality of those men that made so many Chinese 
school students in Singapore pro-communists. The students saw the com­
munists as exemplars of dedication, sacrifice, and selflessness, the revolu­
tionary virtues displayed in the spartan lives of the Chinese communist 
leaders. Those were the prevailing beliefs of the time. 
One important decision we made before the May 1959 general elec­
tion highlighted our position on corruption. Lim Yew Hock's government 
(1956-1959) had started to go corrupt. His education minister, Chew 
Swee Kee, had received S$1 million, money from an American source to 
fight the communists in the coming elections. There was widespread 
market talk of smaller amounts paid for less ideological reasons. We had 
grave reservations over fighting the election to win because we felt unpre-
158 From Third World to First 
pared and not sufficiently organized to take on the communists whom we 
expected to turn on us once we were the government. But to allow this 
group of scoundrels another five-year term would corrupt the public ser­
vants who were on the whole still honest, and once this happened we 
would not be able to work the system. We decided to fight to win. 
There were temptations everywhere, not only in Singapore. For exam­
ple, the first official contacts foreigners have when entering a country are 
immigration and customs officers. At many airports in Southeast Asia, 
travellers often find themselves delayed at customs clearance until a suit­
able inducement (often hard cash) is forthcoming. The same tiresome prac­
tice is found among traffic police; when stopped for alleged speeding, driv­
ers have to hand over their driving license together with the ongoing rate 
in dollars to avoid further action. The superior officers do not set a good 
example. In many cities in the region, even hospital admission after a traf­
fic accident needs a bribe to get prompt attention. Petty power invested in 
men who cannot live on their salaries is an invitation to misuse that power. 
We had a deep sense of mission to establish a clean and effective gov­
ernment. When we took the oath of office at the ceremony in the city 
council chamber in June 1959, we all wore white shirts and white slacks 
to symbolize purity and honesty in our personal behavior and our public 
life. The people expected this of us, and we were determined to live up to 
their expectations. The pro-communists paraded their working-class cre­
dentials in their dress style (rumpled shirt sleeves and slacks), travel mode 
(buses and taxis), sleeping quarters (back rooms of unions offices), and 
Chinese school education. They derided my air-conditioned office and 
home, my large American Studebaker car, my golf and beer drinking, my 
bourgeois family background, and my Cambridge education. But they 
could not accuse my colleagues and me of making money out of the work­
ers and unions we helped. 
All my ministers except one were university graduates. Out of office, 
we were confident of getting by and professionals like myself had every 
expectation of doing so. There was no need to put by something extra for 
that eventuality. More important, most of us had working wives who 
could support the family if we were imprisoned or not around. This 
shaped the attitudes of my ministers and their wives. When ministers 
commanded the respect and confidence of the people, public servants 
Keeping the Government Clean 159 
were also able to hold their heads high and make decisions with confi­
dence. It made a critical difference in our battle against the communists. 
We made sure from the day we took office in June 1959 that every 
dollar in revenue would be properly accounted for and would reach the 
beneficiaries at the grass roots as one dollar, without being siphoned off 
along the way. So, from the very beginning we gave special attention to 
the areas where discretionary powers had been exploited for personal gain 
and sharpened the instruments that could prevent, detect, or deter such 
practices. 
The principal agency charged with this task was the Corrupt Practices 
Investigation Bureau (CPIB) set up by the British in 1952 to deal with 
increasing corruption, especially at lower and middle levels of the police, 
hawker inspectors, and land bailiffs who had to take action against the 
many who broke the law by occupying public roads for illegal hawking, or 
state land for building their squatter huts. These inspectors could either 
issue a summons or look the other way for an appropriate bribe. 
We decided to concentrate on the big takers in the higher echelons 
and directed the CPIB on our priorities. For the smaller fish we set out to 
simplify procedures and ren1ove discretion by having clear published 
guidelines, even doing away with the need for permits or approvals in less 
important areas. As we ran into problems in securing convictions in pros­
ecutions, we tightened the law in stages. 
In 1960, we changed the outdated 1937 anticorruption law and 
widened the definition of gratuity to include anything of value. The 
amendments gave wide powers to investigators, including arrest and 
search and investigation of bank accounts and bank books of suspected per­
sons and their wives, children, or agents. It became unnecessary to prove 
that the person who accepted a bribe was in a position to carry out the 
required favor. The comptroller of income tax was obliged to give informa­
tion concerning anyone investigated. The existing law that the evidence of 
an accomplice was unworthy of credit unless corroborated was changed to 
allow the judge to accept the evidence of an accomplice. 
The most effective change we made in 1960 was to allow the courts to 
treat proof that an accused was living beyond his or her means or had 
property his or her income could not explain as corroborating evidence 
that the accused had accepted or obtained a bribe. With a keen nose to the 
160 From Third World to First 
ground and the power to investigate every officer and every minister, the 
director of the CPIB, working from the Prime Minister's Office, devel­
oped a justly formidable reputation for sniffing out those betraying the 
public trust. 
In 1963, we made it compulsory for witnesses summoned by the 
CPIB to present themselves to give information. In 1989, we increased 
the maximum fine for corruption from S$10,000 to S$100,000. Giving 
false or misleading information to the CPIB became an offense subject to 
imprisonment and a fine of up to S$10,000, and the courts were empow­
ered to confiscate the benefits derived from corruption. 
Corruption used to be organized on a large scale in certain areas. In 
1971, the CPIB broke up a syndicate of over 250 mobile squad policemen 
who received payments ranging from S$5 to S$10 per month from truck 
owners whose vehicles they recognized by the addresses painted on the 
sides of the trucks. Those owners who refused to pay would be constantly 
harassed by having summonses issued against them. 
Customs officers would receive bribes to speed up the checking of 
vehicles smuggling in prohibited goods. Personnel in the Central Sup­
plies Office (the government's procurement department) provided infor­
mation on tender bids for a fee. Officers in the import and export depart­
ment received bribes to hasten the issue of permits. Contractors bribed 
clerks of works ro allow short-piling. Public health laborers were paid by 
shopkeepers and residents to do their job of clearing refuse. Principals and 
teachers in some Chinese schools received commissions from stationery 
suppliers. Human ingenuity is infinite when translating power and dis­
cretion into personal gain. 
It was not too difficult to clean up these organized rackets. Isolated 
opportunistic acts of corruption were more difficult to detect, and when 
discovered had to be squashed. 
High-profile cases made the headlines. Several ministers were guilty 
of corruption , one in each of the decades from the 1960s to the 1980s. Tan 
Kia Gan was the minister for national development until he lost the 1963 
election. We were close colleagues from the early 1950s when he was the 
leader of the Malayan Airways engineers' union and I was its legal adviser. 
We appointed him a director on the board of Malaysian Airways. At a 
board meeting of the company in August 1966, Tan took strong objec-
Keeping the Government Clean 161 
tion to the purchase of Boeing aircraft. A few days later a Mr. Lim con­
tacted First National City Bank, Boeing's bankers, to offer his services for 
a consideration. He was Tan Kia Gan's business friend. The bank knew of 
the government's strict stand against corruption and reported the matter. 
Lim refused to implicate Tan Kia Gan and Tan could not be prosecuted. 
But I was convinced Tan was behind it. Unpleasant and painful as the 
decision was, I issued a statement to say that as the government 's repre­
sentative on the board of Malaysian Airways, he had not discharged his 
duties beyond reproach. I removed him from the board and from all his 
other appointments. Kim San told me later that Tan was down at heel, 
unable to do much because he was ostracized. I was sad but there was no 
other course I could have taken. 
Wee Toon Boon was minister of state in the ministry of the environ­
ment in 1975 when he took a free trip to Indonesia for himself and his 
family members, paid for by a housing developer on whose behalf he 
made representations to civil servants. He also accepted a bungalow 
worth S$500,000 from this developer and took two overdrafts totalling 
S$300,000 in his father's name against the personal guarantee of the 
developer, to speculate in shares. He was a loyal noncommunist trade 
union leader from the 1950s. It was painful to confront him and hear his 
unconvincing protestations of innocence. He was charged, convicted, and 
sentenced to four years and six months in jail. He appealed. The convic­
tions were upheld but the sentence was reduced by 18 months. 
In December 1979, we suddenly faced a serious setback. Phey Yew 
Kok, then president of the NTUC and a PAP MP, was charged on four 
counts of criminal breach of trust involving a total sum of S$83,000. 
He was also charged on two counts under the Trade Unions Act for 
investing S$18,000 of trade union money in a private supermarket 
without the approval of the minister. As was normal in such cases, he 
was released on bail. 
Devan Nair, as secretary-general of the NTUC, was close to Phey Yew 
Kok and believed in his innocence. He wanted the CPIB to review the 
case, saying that an innocent man was being destroyed on false charges. I 
did not agree because I had seen the investigation reports and had allowed 
the CPIB to proceed. He was so convinced of Phey's innocence and con­
cerned at losing a valuable aide in the trade union movement that he 
162 From Third World to First 
spoke vehemently to me over lunch one Saturday. In his presence, I rang 
up the director of the CPIB and told him to show Devan Nair in strict 
confidence the evidence he had against Phey Yew Kok immediately after 
that lunch. After he read the evidence, Devan did not contact me. Phey 
Yew Kok decided to jump bail, and his two sureties lost their S$50,000 
when he never returned. He was last heard of in Thailand, eking out a 
miserable existence as a fugitive, subject to blackmail by immigration 
and police authorities. 
The most dramatic downfall was that of Teh Cheang Wan, then min­
ister for national development. In November 1986, one of his old associ­
ates admitted under questioning by the CPIB that he had given Teh two 
cash payments of S$400,000 each, in one case to allow a development 
company to retain part of its land which had been earmarked for compul­
sory government acquisition, and in the second to assist a developer in the 
purchase of state land for private development. These bribes had taken 
place in 1981 and 1982. He denied receiving the money and tried to bar­
gain with the senior assistant director of the CPIB for the case not to be 
pursued. The cabinet secretary reported this and said Teh had asked to see 
me. I replied that I could not until the investigations were over. A week 
later, on the morning of 15 December 1986, my security officer reported 
that Teh had died and left me a letter: 
Prime Minister 
I have been feeling very sad and depressed for the last two 
weeks. I feel responsible for the occurrence of this unfortunate 
incident and I feel I should accept full responsibilit y. As an hon­
ourable oriental gentleman I feel it is only right that I should pay 
the highest penalty for my mistake. 
Yours faithfully, 
Teh Cheang Wan 
I visited the widow and viewed his body lying in his bed. She said he 
had served the government all his life and wanted to preserve his honor. 
She asked if it was possible not to have a coroner's inquiry. That was only 
possible if she got a death certificate from his doctor that he had died of 
natural causes. Inevitably there was a coroner's inquiry that found he 
Keep ing the Gove rnment Clean 163 
had taken his life with a massive overdose of sodium amytal. The opposi­
tion took it up in Parliament and demanded a commission of inquiry. I 
immediatel y agreed. This created more painful publicity for his wife and 
daughter. Soon afterward they left Singapore and never returned. They 
had lost too much face. 
We had established a climate of opinion that looked upon corruption 
in public office as a threat to society. Teh preferred to take his life rather 
than face disgrace and ostracism. I never understood why he took this 
S$800,000. He was an able and resourceful architect and could have made 
many millions honestly in private practice. 
It is easy to start off with high moral standards, strong convictions, and 
determination to beat down corruption. But it is difficult to live up to 
these good intentions unless the leaders are strong and determined enough 
to deal with all transgressors, and without exceptions. CPIB officers must 
be supported without fear or favor to enforce the rules. 
The Institute of Management Development's World Competitiveness 
Yearbook 1997 ranked the least corrupt countries in the whole world giv­
ing 10 points as the perfect score for the country with no corruption. 
Singapore was ranked as the least corrupt country in Asia with a score of 
9.18, ahead of Hong Kong, Japan, and Taiwan. Transparency Inter­
national (based in Berlin) placed Singapore in seventh place worldwide in 
1998 for absence of corruptio n. 
The percentage, kickback, baksheesh, slush, or whatever the local 
euphemism is a way of life in Asia: People openly accept it as a part of 
their culture. Ministers and officials cannot live on their salaries to the 
standard of their office. The higher they are, the bigger their homes and 
more numerous their wives, concubines, or mistresses, all bedecked in 
jewelry appropriate to the power and position of their men. Singaporeans 
who do business in these countries have to take care not to bring home 
such practices. 
When the Chinese communists came to power they made a great play of 
their total honesty and dedication. Waiters and chambermaids in the 
164 From Third World to First 
China of the 1950s and 1960s would return every scrap of property left 
behind in the hotel, even things the guests had intended to discard. It was 
an ostentatious display of their total disinterest in material possessions. 
But during the height of the Cultural Revolution, 1966-197 6, the sys­
tem broke down. Favoritism, nepotism, and covert corruption infected 
high places. The whole society was degraded as opportunists masqueraded 
as revolutionaries and achieved "helicopter promotions" by betraying and 
persecuting their peers or superiors. Corruption became worse when 
China embarked on its open-door policy in 1978. Many communist 
activists who felt they had been deceived and had wasted the best years of 
their lives set out to make up for lost time and enrich themselves in every 
way they could. The same happened with communists in Vietnam. After 
they opened up to foreign investments and the free market in the late 
1980s, corruption infected the Communist Party. Both regimes, once 
justly proud of their total selflessness and dedication to the communist 
cause, are bedeviled by worse corruption than the decadent capitalist 
Asian countries they used to revile and despise. 
A precondition for an honest government is that candidates must not 
need large sums of money to get elected, or it must trigger off the cycle of 
corruption . The bane of most countries in Asia has been the high cost of 
elections. Having spent a lot to get elected, winners must recover their 
costs and also accumulate funds for the next election. The system is self­
perpetuating. To be elected to Taiwan's legislative yuan in the 1990s, 
some KMT candidates spent as much as US$ l 0-20 million. Once 
elected, they had to recoup and prepare for the next round by using their 
influence with government ministers and officials to get contracts 
awarded, or to convert land use from agricultural to industrial or urban 
development. In Thailand, a former government minister described it as 
"commercial democracy, the purchased mandate." In 1996, some 2,000 
candidates spent about 30 billion bahts (US$ l .2 billion). One prime min­
ister was called Mr. ATM (Automatic Teller Machine) because he was 
renowned for dispensing cash to candidates and voters. He retorted that 
he was not the only ATM. 
In Malaysia, UMNO leaders call it "money politics." In his speech to 
party delegates in October 1996, Prime Minister Dr. Mahathir Mohamad 
noted that some candidates vying for higher positions had been "offering 
Keeping the Government Clean 165 
bribes and gifts to delegates" in exchange for votes. Dr. Mahathir 
deplored the practice of money politics and was moved to tears as he 
urged party delegates "not to let bribery destroy the Malay race, religion 
and nation." According to Malaysian news reports, Bank Negara ran out 
of RM 1,000 and RM5 ,000 notes at the height of the campaign leading to 
the UMNO party delegates' conference in 1993. 
Indonesia was a celebrated example of corruption on such a grand 
scale that Indonesian media coined the acronym "KKN" for Kolusi 
(Collusion), Korupsi (Corruption), and Nepotisme (Nepotism). President 
Suharto's children, friends, and cronies set examples that made KKN an 
irreducible part of Indonesian culture. The American media assessed the 
Suharto family to be worth US$42 billion before the financial crisis 
reduced their value. Corruption was worse under President Habibie. 
Ministers and officials, uncertain of their positions after the election for a 
new president, made the most of the time left. Habibie's aides accumu­
lated huge funds to buy votes in the MPR (People's Consultative 
Assembly) to get elected. The going rate reportedly was more than a 
quarter million U.S. dollars for each vote. 
The most expensive of all election systems is Japan's. Japanese minis­
ters and Diet members (MPs) are paid modest salaries and allowances. A 
Japanese MP requires over US$ l million a year to maintain his support 
staff both in Tokyo and in his constituency as well as to provide gifts to 
voters for birthdays, births, marriages, and funerals. In an election year, 
the candidate needs over US$5 million. He depends on his faction leader 
for funds. Since a leader's power depends on the number of Diet members 
who support and depend on him, he has to amass vast sums to finance his 
followers during and between elections. 
Singapore has avoided the use of money to win elections. As leader of 
the opposition, I had persuaded Chief Minister Lim Yew Hock in 1959 to 
make voting compulsory and prohibit the practice of using cars to take 
voters to the polls. After winning power, we cleaned up triad (secret soci­
ety) influence from politics. Our most formidable opponents, the commu­
nists, did not use money to win voters. Our own election expenses were 
small, well below the amount allowed by law. There was no need for the 
party to replenish its coffers after elections, and between elections there 
were no gifts for voters. We got them to vote for us again and again by 
166 From Third World to First 
providing jobs, building schools, hospitals, community centers, and, 
most important of all, homes which they owned. These are substantial 
benefits that changed their lives and convinced them that their children's 
future lay with the PAP. Opposition parties also did not need money. 
They defeated our candidates because the electorate wanted an opposition 
MP to pressure the government for more concessions. 
Western liberals have argued that a completely unfettered press will 
expose corruption and make for clean, honest government. Yet uninhib­
ited and freewheeling press and television in India, the Philippines, 
Thailand, Taiwan, South Korea, and Japan have not stopped the pervasive 
and deeply embedded corruption in these countries, while the most 
telling example of a free media being part and parcel of its owner's cor­
ruption is former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi. He owns a 
large media network but was himself investigated and charged for corrupt 
practices committed before he became prime minister. 
On the other hand Singapore has shown that a system of clean, no­
money elections helps to preserve an honest government. But Singapore 
will remain clean and honest only if honest and able men are willing to 
fight elections and assume office. They must be paid a wage commensu­
rate with what men of their ability and integrity are earning for manag­
ing a big corporation or a successful legal or other professional practice. 
They have to manage a Singapore economy that yielded an annual growth 
rate of 8 to 9 percent in the last two decades, giving its citizens a per 
capita GDP that the World Bank rated in 1995 as the ninth highest in 
the world. 
With the founder generation of leaders, honesty had become a habit. 
My colleagues would spurn any attempt to suborn them. They had put 
their lives in jeopardy to achieve power, not to enrich themselves, but to 
change society. However, this group could not be replicated because it 
was not possible to recreate the conditions that made them different. Our 
successors have become ministers as one of many career options, and not 
the most attractive one. If we underpay men of quality as ministers, we 
cannot expect them to stay long in office earning a fraction of what they 
could outside. With high economic growth and higher earnings in the 
private sector, ministers' salaries have to match their counterparts' in the 
Keeping the Gove rnment Clean 167 
private sector. Underpaid ministers and public officials have ruined many 
governments in Asia. Adequate remuneration is vital for high standards 
of probity in political leaders and high officials. 
In a debate on the budget in March 1985, I took the opposition to task 
for opposing ministerial pay increases. J. B. Jeyaretnam of the Workers' 
Party had contrasted my monthly salary of S$29,000 with that of 
the prime minister of Malaysia who was paid S$10,000, but took only 
S$9,000. I went further to compare the salaries of Philippines President 
Marcos at 100,000 pesos yearly, or just over S$1,000 a month, and the 
president of Indonesia , governing 150 million people at a monthly salary 
of 1.2 million rupiahs or S$2,500. However, they were all wealthier than I 
was. An Indonesian leader retained his official residence on retirement. A 
Malaysian prime minister was given a house or land to build his private 
residence. My official residence belonged to the government. I had no 
perks, no cars with chauffeurs thrown in, or ministerial quarters with gar­
deners, cooks, and other servants in attendance. My practice was to have all 
benefits expressed in a lump sum and let the prime minister and ministers 
themselves decide what they wanted to spend it on. 
I referred to the wage scales of the People's Republic of China. Their 
lowest wage was 18 yuan and the highest 560 yuan, a ratio of 1:31. But 
this did not reflect the difference in the quality of life between the lowest 
and the highest in the land who lived behind the walls of the Zhong­
nanhai near the Forbidden City. Nor did it take into account the access to 
different foods and goods, with cooks, other domestic staff, and medical 
services that made for a different quality of life. 
Ostentatious egalitarianism is good politics. For decades in Mao's 
China, the people wore the same-style Mao jacket and trousers, ostensibly 
of the same material with the same ill-fitting cut. In fact there were dif­
ferent grades of Mao jackets. A provincial leader in charge of tourism 
explained to one of my ministers that while they might look alike, they 
were of different quality cloth. To emphasize his point, he unbuttoned his 
jacket to show that it was fur-lined. 
The need for popular support makes governments who have to be 
elected into office, as a rule, underpay ministers in their official salaries. 
But semihidde n perks in housing, an expense account, a car, travel, chil-
168 From Third World to First 
dren's education, and other allowances often make up more than their 
salaries. 
In successive debates in Parliament in the 1980s and 1990s, I pointed 
out that the remuneration of ministers and political appointees in Britain, 
the United States, and most countries in the West had not kept pace with 
their economic growth. They had assumed that people who went into pol­
itics were gentlemen with private means. Indeed, in prewar Britain, peo­
ple without private incomes were seldom found in Parliament. While this 
is no longer the case in Britain or the United States, most successful peo­
ple are too busy and doing too well to want to be in government. 
In the United States, highly paid persons from the private sector are 
appointed by the president for brief periods of one or two terms. Then 
they return to their private sector occupations as lawyers, company chair­
persons, or lobbyists with enhanced value because they now enjoy easy 
access to key people in the administration. I thought this "revolving 
door" system undesirable. 
After independence I had frozen ministerial salaries and kept public 
service wage increases at a low level to be sure that we would cope with 
the expected unemployment and slowdown in the economy and to set an 
example of restraint. When we had no serious unemployment by 1970, 
and everybody breathed a little easier, I increased ministers' salaries from 
S$2,500 to S$4,500 per month but kept my own fixed at S$3,500 to 
remind the public service that some restraint was still necessary. Every 
few years I had to increase ministerial salaries to narrow the widening gap 
with private sector rewards. 
In 1978, Dr. Tony Tan was general manager of the Oversea-Chinese 
Banking Corporation, a big local bank, on a salary scale that would have 
taken him to S$950,000 per year. I had persuaded him to resign to 
become minister of state, for which he was paid less than a third of his for­
mer salary, apart from losing his perks, the most valuable of which was a 
car with a driver. Ong Teng Cheong, the minister for communications, 
had also made a sacrifice by giving up a successful practice as an architect 
during a building boom. 
When I was senior minister, I proposed in Parliament in 1994 that 
the government settle a formula so that revisions to salaries of ministers, 
Keeping the Government Clean 169 
judges, and top civil servants were automatic, linked to the income tax 
returns of the private sector. With the Singapore economy growing at 7 
to 10 percent per annum for over two decades, public sector salaries 
were always lagging two or three years behind the private sector. In 
1995, Prime Minister Goh decided on a formula I had proposed that 
would peg the salaries of ministers and senior public officers to those of 
their private sector counterparts . This would automatically entitle them 
to an increase as incomes in the private sector increased. This change to 
a formula, pegged at two-thirds of the earnings of their private sector 
equivalents as disclosed in their income tax returns, caused an enormous 
stir, especially with the professionals who felt that it was completely out 
of proportion to what ministers were paid in advanced countries. People 
had for so long been accustomed to having public servants paid modest 
salaries that the idea that ministers not only exercised power but were 
also paid in accordance with the importance of the job upset their sense 
of propriety. I was able to help the prime minister justify this change 
and rebut the arguments that ministers were more than adequately 
compensated by the honor of high office and the power they wielded, 
and that public service should entail sacrifice of income. I believed this 
high-minded approach was unrealistic and the surest way to make min­
isters serve only briefly, whereas continuity in office and the experience 
thus gained have been a great advantage and strength in the Singapore 
government. Our ministers have provided the experience and judgment 
the government has shown in its decisions, the result of their ability to 
think and plan long-term. 
In the general election 18 months later, the prime minister carried 
the electorate although the opposition made ministerial salaries an issue. 
People want a good, honest, clean government that produced results. 
That was what the PAP provided. It is now less difficult to recruit talent 
from the private sector. Before the salary formula was implemented top 
litigation lawyers were earning S$1 to 2 million a year, while judges were 
paid less than S$300,000. Without this change, we would never have 
been able to appoint some of our best practicing lawyers to the judiciary. 
We also had the salaries of doctors and other professionals in government 
service linked to the incomes of their counterparts in private practice. 
170 From Third World to First 
This salary formula does not mean increments every year, because the 
private sector incomes go up and down. When they went down in 1995, 
the salaries of all ministers and senior officials were reduced accordingly 
in 1997. 
To guard against a freak election of a less than honorable and honest 
group into government, I had proposed at a National Day Rally in 
August 1984 that we have an elected president to safeguard the nation's 
reserves. He would also have powers to override a prime minister who 
held up investigations for corruption against himself, his ministers , or 
senior officials, and to veto unsuitable appointments to high positions 
like chief justice, chief of defense staff, or commissioner of police. Such a 
president would need an independent mandate from the electorate. Many 
believed I was preparing a position for myself after I stepped down as 
prime minister. In fact, I had no interest in this high office as it would be 
too passive for my temperament. This proposal and its implications were 
debated as a white paper in Parliament in 1988. Several years later, in 
1992, the constitution was amended by Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong 
to provide for an elected president. We had to keep the right balance 
between the president 's powers and the legitimate discretionary powers of 
the prime minister and his cabinet. 
When the countries of East Asia from South Korea to Indonesia were dev­
astated by the financial crisis in 1997, corruption and cronyism aggra­
vated their woes. Singapore weathered the crisis better because there was 
no corruption and cronyism that had cost the other countries many bil­
lions in losses. 
It was the high standards we maintained that made Prime Minister 
Goh Chok Tong order an investigation into purchases in 1995 of two 
properties each made by my wife on my behalf and by my son Lee Hsien 
Loong, the deputy prime minister. They had both enjoyed discounts for 
the property purchases. The developer had given the same unsolicited 5 to 
7 percent discounts on these purchases as he had given to 5 to 10 percent 
of his other buyers at a soft launch to test the market. Immediately after 
Keeping the Government Clean 171 
their purchase, in the heat of the property boom, the properties escalated 
in price. Those who had not been given a chance to buy at the soft launch 
made complaints to the committee of the Stock Exchange of Singapore 
(SES). (The developer was a public-listed company.) After investigations 
the SES found that the developer had acted within its rights. Because my 
brother was a nonexecutive director of the company, a rumor went around 
that my son and I had gained an unfair advantage when purchasing these 
properties. The Monetary Authority of Singapore investigated and 
reported to Prime Minister Goh that there was nothing improper in the 
discounts given to us. 
Choo was indignant at the charge of impropriety. She had been a con­
veyancing lawyer for 40 years, and knew that giving discounts in sales 
was a common practice by all developers. I was equally angry and decided 
to scotch suspicions of improper dealings by going public with our pur­
chases and the unsolicited discounts. We paid over the value of the dis­
counts, which amounted to a total of S$ l million, to the finance minister 
(i.e., the government). The prime minister ordered this sum to be 
returned to us because he agreed there had been no impropriety and the 
government was not entitled to the money. Loong and I did not want to 
appear to have benefited from my brother being a director of the devel­
oper company and decided to give the S$ l million to charity. 
I asked the prime minister to take the matter to Parliament for a 
thorough airing of the issue. In the debate, opposition MPs, including 
two lawyers, one of them the leader of the opposition, said that in their 
experience the giving of such discounts was standard marketing practice 
and there was nothing improper in our purchases. This open and com­
plete disclosure of a perceived unfair advantage made it a nonissue in the 
general election a year later. As I told the House, the fact that the system 
I had set in place could investigate and report upon my conduct proved 
that it was impersonal and effective, and that no one was above the law. 
13. Greening Singapore 
On my first visit to the Great Hall of the People in Beijing in 1976, there 
were spittoons in the meeting rooms where they greeted us. Some of the 
Chinese leaders actually used them. When Deng Xiaoping visited Singa­
pore in 1978, we provided a Ming blue and white spittoon. Although we 
placed it next to his chair in the conference room, he did not use it. He 
might have noticed that Chinese Singaporeans did not spit. On my next 
visit to Beijing in 1980, I saw that spittoons had been removed from the 
Great Hall. A few years later, when I gave dinner in Singapore to Gu Mu, 
a state councillor in charge of economics, I mentioned that they had 
stopped using spittoons in the Great Hall of the People. He chuckled and 
said they had removed them from the meeting rooms but still used them 
in their offices-it was too old a habit to eradicate. 
I had introduced antispitting campaigns in the 1960s. But even in the 
1980s some taxi drivers would spit out of their car windows and some peo­
ple were still spitting in markets and food centers. We persisted and dis­
seminated the message through schools and the media that spitting spread 
diseases such as tuberculosis. Now people seldom see spitting in public. 
We are an immigrant people who have uprooted ourselves from our 
ancient homelands and are prepared to abandon old habits to make good in 
a new country. This progress encouraged me to alter other bad habits. 
After independence, I searched for some dramatic way to distinguish 
ourselves from other Third World countries. I settled for a clean and 
green Singapore. One arm of my strategy was to make Singapore into an 
174 From Third World to First 
oasis in Southeast Asia, for if we had First World standards then business­
people and tourists would make us a base for their business and tours of 
the region. The physical infrastructure was easier to improve than the 
rough and ready ways of the people. Many of them had moved from 
shanty huts with a hole in the ground or a bucket in an outhouse to high­
rise apartments with modern sanitation, but their behavior remained the 
same. We had to work hard to be rid of littering, noise nuisance, and 
rudeness, and get people ro be considerate and courteous. 
We started from a low base. In the 1960s, long queues would form at 
our "Meet the People" sessions, clinics where ministers and MPs helped 
solve the problems of their constituents. The unemployed, many accom­
panied by wives and children, would plead for jobs, taxi or hawker 
licenses, or permission ro sell food in school cafeterias. These were the 
human faces behind the unemployment statistics. Thousands would sell 
cooked food on the pavements and streets in total disregard of traffic, 
health, or other considerations. The resulting litter and dirt, the stench of 
rotting food, and the clutter and obstructio ns turned many parts of the 
city into slums. 
Many became "pirate taxi" drivers, unlicensed and without insurance 
cover, exploited by businesspeople who rented them junk private cars. 
They charged slightly more than the buses and much less than licensed 
taxis. They stopped without signalling to pick up or drop off passengers 
at will and were a menace to other road users. Hundreds, eventually thou­
sands, of pirate taxis clogged our streets and destroyed bus services. 
For years we could not clean up the city by removing these illegal 
hawkers and pirate taxi drivers. Only after 1971, when we had created 
many jobs, were we able ro enforce the law and reclaim the streets. We 
licensed the cooked food hawkers and moved them from the roads and 
pavements to properly constructed nearby hawker centers, with piped 
water, sewers, and garbage disposal. By the early 1980s we had resettled 
all hawkers. Some were such excellent cooks that they became great 
tourist attractions. A few became millionaires who drove to work in their 
Mercedes-Benz and employed waiters. It was the enterprise, drive, and 
talent of such people that made Singapore. Pirate taxi drivers were ban­
ished from the roads only after we had reorganized bus services and could 
provide chem with alternative employment. 
Greening Singapore 175 
The city became scruffy while we were in Malaysia, after two commu­
nal riots in July and September 1964. Morale went down and discipline 
slackened. Two incidents stirred me to action. One morning in November 
1964 I looked across the Padang from my office window at City Hall to 
see several cows grazing on the Esplanade! A few days later a lawyer driv­
ing on a main road just outside the city hit a cow and died. The Indian 
cowherds were bringing their cows into the city to graze on the roadsides 
and on the Esplanade itself. I called a meeting of public health officers 
and spelt out an action plan to solve this problem. We gave owners of 
cows and goats a grace period until 31 January 1965, after which all such 
stray animals would be taken to the slaughterhouses and the meat given 
to welfare homes. By December 1965, we had seized and slaughtered 5 3 
cows. Very quickly, all cattle and goats were back in their sheds. 
To achieve First World standards in a Third World region, we set out to 
transform Singapore into a tropical garden city. I had been planting trees 
at the opening of community centers, during my visits to various estab­
lishments and at traffic roundabouts to commemorate the completion of a 
road junction. Some thrived, many did not. Revisiting a community cen­
ter, I would find a new sapling, just transplanted for my visit. I concluded 
that we needed a department dedicated to the care of trees after they had 
been planted. I established one in the ministry of national development. 
After some progress, I met all senior officers of the governme nt and 
statutory boards to involve them in the "clean and green" movement. I 
recounted how I had visited almost 50 countries and stayed in nearly as 
many official guesthouses. What impressed me was not the size of the 
buildings but the standard of their maintenance. I knew when a country 
and its administrators were demoralized from the way the buildings had 
been neglected-washbasins cracked, taps leaking, water closets not func­
tioning properly, a general dilapidation, and, inevitably, unkempt gar­
dens. VIPs would judge Singapore the same way. 
We planted millions of trees, palms, and shrubs. Greening raised the 
morale of people and gave them pride in their surroundings. We taught 
them to care for and not vandalize the trees. We did not differentiate 
between middle-class and working-class areas. The British had superior 
176 From Third World to First 
white enclaves in Tanglin and around Governme nt House that were 
neater, cleaner, and greener than the "native" areas. That would have been 
politically disastrous for an elected government. We kept down flies and 
mosquitoes, and cleaned up smelly drains and canals. Within a year there 
was a distinct spruceness of public spaces. 
Perseverance and stamina were needed to fight old habits: People 
walked over plants, trampled on grass, despoiled flowerbeds, pilfered 
saplings, or parked bicycles or motorcycles against the larger ones, knock­
ing them down. And it was not just the poorer people who were the 
offenders. A doctor was caught removing from a central road divider a 
newly planted valuable Norfolk Island pine which he fancied for his gar­
den. To overcome the initial indifference of the public, we educated their 
children in schools by getting them to plant trees, care for them, and 
grow gardens. They brought the message home to their parents. 
Nature did not favor us with luscious green grass as it has New 
Zealand and Ireland. An Australian plant expert and a New Zealand soil 
expert came in 1978 at my request to study our soil conditions. Their 
report caught my interest and I asked to see them. They explained that 
Singapore was part of the equatorial rainforest belt, with strong sunshine 
and heavy rainfall throughout the year. When trees were cut down, heavy 
rainfall would wash off the topsoil and leach the nutrients. To have grass 
green and lush, we had to apply fertilizers regularly, preferably compost, 
which would not be so easily washed away, and lime, because our soil was 
too acidic. The lstana curator tested this on our lawns. Suddenly the grass 
became greener. We had all school and other sports fields and stadiums 
similarly treated. The bare patches around the goal posts with sparse, 
tired-looking yellow grass were soon carpeted green. Gradually, the whole 
city greened up. A visiting French minister, a guest at our National Day 
reception in the 1970s, was ecstatic as he congratulated me in French; I 
did not speak it, but understood the word "verdure." He was captivated 
by the greenness of the city. 
Most countries in Asia then paid little or no attention to greening. That 
Singapore was different, and had taken tough action against stray cattle, 
made news in the American Look magazine of November 1969. Enthused 
afrer a visit, Hong Kong's director of information services announced that 
he would put up a two-year antilitter campaign based on our experience. 
Greening Singapore 177 
For the Commonwealth prime ministers' conference set for mid­
January 1971, I rallied our officials to make that extra effort and give vis­
itors a better impression of Singapore. We briefed the service industry, 
shopkeepers, taxi drivers, and workers in hotels and restaurants to exert 
themselves to be courteous and friendly. They responded and the feedback 
from visiting prime ministers, presidents, and their staff was good. 
Encouraged by this, the tourist promotion board launched a campaign for 
courteous and gracious service from salespeople and others in the service 
trade. I intervened. It was absurd if our service personnel were courteous 
to tourists but not to Singaporeans. I got the ministry of defense in charge 
of national servicemen, the ministry of education with half a million stu­
dents under its care, and the National Trades Union Congress with several 
hundred thousand workers to spread the message that courtesy must be 
our way of life, to make Singapore a pleasanter place for ourselves, quite 
apart from the tourist trade. 
Our biggest dividend was when Asean leaders decided to compete in 
the greening of their cities. Malaysia's Dr. Mahathir, who had stayed at 
the lstana Villa in the 1970s, asked me how I got the lstana lawns to be so 
green. When he became prime minister, he greened up Kuala Lumpur. 
President Suharto pushed greening in Jakarta, as did President Marcos in 
Manila and Prime Minister Thanin in Bangkok, all in the late 1970s. I 
encouraged them, reminding them that they had a greater variety of trees 
and a similar favorable climate. 
No other project has brought richer rewards to the region. Our neigh­
bors have tried to out-green and out-bloom each other. Greening was pos­
itive competition that benefitted everyone-it was good for morale, for 
tourism, and for investors. It was immensely better that we competed to 
be the greenest and cleanest in Asia. I can think of many areas where com­
petition could be harmful, even deadly. 
On the first Sunday in November 1971, we launched an annual Tree 
Planting Day that involved all MPs, community centers, and their lead­
ers. We have not missed a single tree planting day since. Saplings planted 
in November need minimum watering as the rainy season begins then. 
Because our own suitable varieties of trees, shrubs, and creepers were 
limited, I sent research teams to visit botanical gardens, public parks, and 
arboreta in the tropical and subtropical zones to select new varieties from 
178 From Third World to First 
countries with a similar climate in Asia, Africa, the Caribbean, and 
Central America. They brought back many free-flowering plants and trees 
to test on our soil and climate. Unfortuna tely, beautiful free-flowerin g 
trees from the Caribbean will not flower in Singapore because we do not 
have their cool winters. Those from India and Myanmar (formerly Burma) 
seldom flowered in Singapore because they needed the annual long dry 
season between monsoons of their native habitat. Our botanists brought 
back 8,000 different varieties and got some 2,000 to grow in Singapore. 
They propagated the successful sturdy ones and added variety to our 
greenery. 
A key implementer of my green policy was an able officer, Wong Yew 
Kwan. A Malaysian, he had been trained in silviculture, intending to 
work for rubber and oil palm plantations in Malaysia. He brought his 
expertise to bear on the problems of roadside trees, shrubs, and other 
greenery and created parks and park-connectors in Singapore. I showered 
him with memos, endless wish lists that he assiduously responded to, suc­
cessfully implementing many of them. His successor, Chua Sian Eng, was 
an agriculturist who made himself a tree expert and kept up the good 
work. 
Every time I return to Singapore after a few weeks' absence, and see the 
trees, palms, green grass, and free-flowering shrubs as I drive along East 
Coast Parkway from the airport into the city, my spirits rise. Greening is 
the most cost-effective project I have launched. 
One compelling reason to have a clean Singapore is our need to collect as 
much as possible of our rainfall of 95 inches a year. I put Lee Ek Tieng, a 
civil engineer, then the head of the Anti-Pollution Unit, in charge of a 
plan to dam up all our streams and rivers. The plan took about 10 years to 
implement. He had to ensure that all sewage, sullage, and other soiled 
water from homes and factories emptied into the sewers. Only clean rain­
water runoff from the roofs, gardens, and open spaces was allowed into the 
open drains that flowed into dammed-up rivers. By 1980, we were able to 
provide some 63 million gallons of water per day, about half of our daily 
water consumption then. 
Greening Singapore 179 
My most ambitious plan was to clean up the Singapore River and 
Kallang Basin and bring fish back to the rivers. When I first proposed it 
in February 1977, many, especially industrialists, asked, "Why clean up? 
The Rochore Canal {which flows into Kallang Basin}, and the Singapore 
River have always been filthy; part of Singapore's heritage! " I would have 
none of this. They smelled putrid. A blind telephone operator in Chao's 
law office knew when his bus was approaching Singapore River by its dis­
tinctive stench. Trade effluents were responsible for half of our water pol­
lution problem. Every stream, culvert, and rivulet had to be free from pol­
lution. Teh Cheang Wan, then chief executive officer of the HDB, 
quipped, "It will be a lot cheaper for you to buy fish and put them in the 
river every week." 
Lee Ek Tieng was not deterred. He had worked closely with me and 
was confident of my support. Cleaning up the Singapore River and 
Kallang Basin was a massive engineering job. He laid underground sew­
ers for the whole island, which was especially difficult in the heavily 
built-up city center. We moved people from some 3,000 backyard and 
cottage industries and resettled them in industrial estates with sullage 
traps for oil and other wastes. Since the founding of Singapore in 1819, 
lighters and open barges had plied the river. Their workers lived, cooked, 
and did their ablutions on these vessels. They had to move to Pasir 
Panjang on the west coast, while boatyards along the Kallang River were 
relocated at Tuas and the Jurong River. Five thousand street vendors of 
cooked food and market produce had to go into properly designed centers. 
Accustomed to doing business on the road rent-free and easily accessible 
to customers, they resisted moving to centers where they would have to 
pay rent and water and electricity charges. We gently but firmly moved 
them and subsidized their rentals. Even so, some failed. 
We phased out the rearing of over 900,000 pigs on 8,000 farms 
because pig waste polluted our streams. We also shut down many food­
fish ponds, leaving only 14 in agrotechnology parks and a few for leisure 
fishing. Food-fish are now farmed offshore in shallow net-cages in the 
Straits of Johor as well as in deep-sea net-cages off deeper waters near our 
southern islands. 
We had a resettlement unit to deal with the haggling and bargaining 
180 From Third World to First 
involved in every resettlement, whether of hawkers, farmers, or cottage 
industrialists. They were never happy to be moved or to change their 
business. This was a hazardous political task that unless carefully and 
sympathetically handled would lose us votes in the next election. A com­
mittee of officials and MPs whose constituencies were affected helped to 
limit the political fallout. 
Resettling farmers was the toughest. We paid compensation based on 
size of farm structures, the cemented area of open space within their farm 
holding, and the number of fruit trees and fishponds. As our economy 
thrived, we increased the amount, but even the most generous payment 
was not enough. Older farmers did not know what to do with themselves 
and their compensation money. Living in apartments, they missed their 
pigs, ducks, chickens, fruit trees, and vegetable plots which had provided 
them with free food. Fifteen to 20 years after being resettled in HOB new 
towns, many still voted against the PAP. They felt the government had 
destroyed their way of life. 
In November 1987, I found great satisfaction in going by launch up a 
clean Kallang Basin and Singapore River, until then the open sewers of 
Singapore. At the Clean River ceremony , I presented the men responsible 
with gold medals to commemorate the achievement. We later built eight 
new estuarine reservoirs, several of them open for boating and recreational 
fishing. The yield of potable water rose to 120 million gallons per day. 
Behind each successful project was a dedicated and able officer, trained in 
that discipline and applying himself to our unique problems. There 
would have been no clean and green Singapore without Lee Ek Tieng. I 
could spell out broad conceptual objectives, but he had to work out the 
engineering solutions. He later became head of the civil service. 
In 1993, Winsemius went fishing on the Singapore River and had the 
satisfaction of catching a fish. Clean rivers made possible a different qual­
ity of life. The value and use of land rose significantly, especially in the 
city and at sites abutting rivers and canals. We bought sand from Indo­
nesia to lay a beach along the banks of the Kallang Basin where people 
sunbathe and water ski today. Waterside high-rise condominiums have 
taken over from unsightly small shipyards. For those who remember the 
Singapore River when it was a sewer, it is a dream to walk along the banks. 
Shophouses and warehouses have been restored and turned into cafes, 
Greening Singapore 181 
restaurants, shops, and hotels, and people wine and dine al fresco by the 
river or on traditional Chinese barges parked alongside. 
You can tell how polluted a city is by its greenery. Where exhaust fumes 
from poorly maintained cars, buses, and diesel trucks are excessive, the 
shrubs, covered in black soot particles, wilt and die. In Boston during 
the autumn of 1970, I was surprised to see lines of cars heading for gas 
stations. My driver explained that it was the last day for cars to renew 
their license for the following year, and they had first to be tested and 
certified roadworthy by authorized gas stations. I decided to set up an 
Anti-Pollutio n Unit as part of my office. We had monitoring instru­
ments placed along busy roads to measure dust particles and smoke den­
sity and the concentration of sulphur dioxide emitted by motor vehicles. 
Other cities had clean and green suburbs that gave their residents respite 
from city centers. Singapore's size forced us to work, play, and reside in 
the same small place, and this made it necessary to preserve a clean and 
gracious environment for rich and poor alike. 
In the heart of Jurong Town, surrounded by hundreds of factories, we 
built a bird park in 1971. Without strict antipollution standards, these 
birds from the world over could not have thrived as they are doing. We 
also had greening in Jurong itself. All factories had to landscape their 
grounds and plant trees before they could commence operations. 
Although we have solved our domestic air pollution, the whole of 
Singapore and the surrounding region was covered in haze from forest fires 
in Sumatra and Borneo in 1994 and 1997. Plantation companies, after 
extracting the valuable timber, set fire to the rest of the forest to clear the 
land for oil palms and other crops. In the dry season, the fires raged for 
months. In mid-1997, a thick poisonous haze spread over Malaysia, 
Singapore, Thailand, and the Philippines, causing airports to close and 
thousands to fall ill. 
I also had to deal with noise pollution which the old Singapore suf­
fered from vehicles, pile-driving on construction sites, loudspeakers from 
open-air entertainment, and television sets and radios. Slowly and method­
ically, we brought the decibels down by enforcing new rules. Noisiest and 
most dangerous was the custom of firing crackers during the Chinese New 
182 From Third World to First 
Year season. Many, especially children, suffered serious burns and injuries. 
Whole squatter villages of wooden buildings had been burnt down. After a 
massive fire on the last day of the 1970 Chinese New Year festivities, when 
five persons were killed and many injured, I stopped this age-old Chinese 
tradition of firing crackers, making it an offense. Nevertheless, two years 
later, two unarmed policemen were brutally attacked when they tried to 
prevent a group from firing crackers. We took it one step further and 
banned the importation of firecrackers altogether. When we live in high­
rises 10 to 20 storys high, incompatible traditional practices had to stop. 
In the 1960s, the pace of urban renewal had quickened. We went through 
a phase when we recklessly demolished the old rundown city center to 
build anew. By late 1970, we felt disquiet over the speed at which we 
were erasing our past, so we set up a Preservation of Monuments Board in 
1971 to identify and preserve buildings of historic, traditional, archaeo­
logical, architectural, or artistic interest, and civic, cultural, and commer­
cial buildings significant in Singapore 's history. The buildings designated 
include old Chinese temples, Indian temples, mosques, Anglican and 
Catholic churches, Jewish synagogues, nineteenth century traditional 
Chinese architecture, and former colonial government offices in the old 
civic center. The pride of the colonial past was Government House, once 
the seat of British governors, now the lstana where the president and 
prime minister have their offices. 
We tried to retain Singapore's distinctive character and identity to 
remind us of our past. Fortunately we had not demolished the historic 
districts of Kampong Glam, the historical seat of Malay royalty, Little 
India, Chinatown, and the old warehouses along the Singapore River. 
From the 1970s, to save the young from a nasty and dangerous addiction, 
we banned all advertising for cigarettes. Progressively , we banned smok­
ing from all public places-elevators, buses, MRT (Mass Rapid Transit) 
trains and stations, and, eventually , all air-conditioned offices and restau­
rants. I followed the Canadians who blazed the trail. The Americans were 
far behind because their tobacco lobby was too powerful. 
Greenin g Singapore 183 
We had a "Smoke-Free Week" every year. As part of this campaign, I 
recounted on television my personal experience, how I used to smoke 
about 20 cigarettes a day until 195 7, when after three weeks of campaign­
ing in the city council election, I lost my voice and could not even thank 
the voters. Since I could not keep my addiction within limits, I stopped 
smoking altogether . I suffered for a fortnight. In the 1960s I became 
allergic to tobacco smoke and disallowed smoking in my air-conditioned 
office and the cabinet room. Within a few years most ministers had given 
up smoking except two chainsmokers, Raja and Eddie Barker. They 
would slip out of cabinet meetings for about 10 minutes to light up and 
satisfy their craving on the open veranda. 
It is a relentless battle that we are still waging. The American tobacco 
industry's wealth and advertising power make it a formidable enemy. The 
number of older smokers has decreased but the young, including girls, are 
still being trapped into addiction. We cannot afford to lose this battle. 
A ban on chewing gum brought us much ridicule in America. As 
early as 1983, the minister for national development had proposed that 
we ban it because of the problems caused by spent chewing gum inserted 
into keyholes and mailboxes and on elevator buttons. Spitting of chewing 
gum on floors and common corridors increased the cost of cleaning and 
damaged cleaning equipment. At first I thought a ban too drastic. Then 
vandals stuck chewing gum onto the sensors of the doors of our MRT 
trains and services were disrupted. I was no longer prime minister but 
Prime Minister Goh and his other colleagues decided on a ban in January 
1992. Several ministers who had studied in American universities 
recounted how the underside of lecture theater seats were filthy with 
chewing gum stuck to them like barnacles. The ban greatly reduced the 
nuisance, and after stocks in the shops had been removed the gum prob­
lem at MRT stations and trains was negligible. 
Foreign correspondents in Singapore have no big scandals of corrup­
tion or grave wrongdoings to report. Instead they reported on the fervor 
and frequency of these "do good" campaigns, ridiculing Singapore as a 
"nanny state." They laughed at us. But I was confident we would have the 
last laugh. We would have been a grosser, ruder, cruder society had we not 
made these efforts to persuade our people to change their ways. We did 
not measure up as a cultivated, civilized society and were not ashamed to 
184 From Third World to First 
set about trying to become one in the shortest time possible. First, we 
educated and exhorted our people. After we had persuaded and won over a 
majority, we legislated to punish the willful minority. It has made 
Singapore a more pleasant place to live in. If this is a "nanny state," I am 
proud to have fostered one. 
14. Managing the Media 
In the 40 years since 1959, the Singapore press has evolved away from the 
norms set by the colonial government. We brought this about by laying 
down out-of-bounds markers, mostly for our English-language media. 
They had been influenced by the British editors and reporters who used to 
be their superiors in the Straits Times group. It took many years before a 
younger generation of journalists in the 1980s recognized that the politi­
cal culture of Singapore was and will stay different from the Western 
norm. However, our journalists are exposed to and influenced by the 
reporting styles and political attitudes of the American media, always 
skeptical and cynical of authority. The Chinese and Malay press do not 
model themselves on newspapers in the West. Their cultural practice is 
for constructive support of policies they agree with, and criticism in mea­
sured terms when they do not. 
By the 1990s, our journalists aged below 40 had all gone through 
similar Singapore schools. Yet differences between the English, Chinese, 
and Malay press continue; the cultural gap has not been bridged. These 
differences are evident in their editorial comments, headlines, selection of 
news, and choice of readers' letters for publication. Chinese-educated 
readers do not have the same political and social values as the English­
educated. They place greater emphasis on the interests of the group than 
those of the individual. 
The main English newspaper, the Straits Times, when owned by the 
British, openly promoted their interests. It enjoyed the patronage of 
186 From Third World to First 
British commercial firms which fed it with advertisements and of the 
colonial government which provided it with news and revenue from pub­
lishing official notices. No local English-language newspaper could ever 
reach even a fraction of its circulatio n and influence. 
The Chinese-language newspapers were left to their own devices. 
Their owners, wealthy Chinese merchants, used them to advance their 
interests. To attract readers, they played up news about China, Chinese 
education and culture, and the war in China. The two main papers, the 
Nanyang Siang Pau and the Sin Chew ]it Poh, were owned by two wealthy 
Chinese families with right-wing but opportunistic editors working 
through young Chinese journalists of whom most were left-wing and 
quite a few were Communist Party activists. 
The vernacular papers-Chinese, Tamil, and other languages---catered 
to their readers' communal interests and did not have any Singapore iden­
tity. The Malay paper, Utusan Melayu, printed in the Arabic script (Jawi), 
made itself the vehicle of pan-Malay-In donesian nationalism. 
Almost from the start, the Straits Times was bitterly hostile to the 
PAP. It saw the noncommunist leadership as a Trojan horse for the Chinese­
speaking communists. The Nanyang Siang Pau, Sin Chew ]it Poh, and sev­
eral smaller Chinese papers strongly supported the PAP because of its 
left-wing policy and the united front we had with the communists. Many 
of the Chinese journalists were pro-communist. The Utusan Melayu was 
friendly in spite of our links with Chinese-speaking communists because 
Yusof Ishak, its owner and managing editor, was my friend and had 
appointed me the paper's lawyer. He was later to become the first presi­
dent of Singapore. My early experiences in Singapore and Malaya shaped 
my views about the claim of the press to be the defender of truth and free­
dom of speech. The freedom of the press was the freedom of its owners to 
advance their personal and class interests. 
As the first general election for a self-governing Singapore approached 
in May 1959, the Straits Times became vehemently anti-PAP to prevent us 
from winning and forming the government. We decided to meet it head­
on. Raja had worked for the Straits Times as a senior writer. He confirmed 
our view that the paper was run for British interests. It was managed by 
a big, burly, thuggish-looking but competent English newspaperman 
called Bill Simmons. Simmons took seriously my open threat to settle 
Managing the Media 187 
scores with the paper if, in spite of its opposition, we won. It was prepar­
ing to move its editorial staff to Kuala Lumpur after the election should 
this happen. I fired my first salvo in mid-April , two weeks before polling 
day: "It is an open secret that Straits Times editorial staff would scoot to 
Kuala Lumpur." I listed the flagrantly biased reporting by its white expa­
triate journalists, warning that we would give it to them as hard as they 
were giving it to us. 
Next day, Raja followed up with an attack on the English-language 
Singapore Standar d, owned by the two Chinese millionaire Aw brothers of 
Tiger Balm (an ointment panacea for all aches and pains) fame. The 
Standard had turned against the PAP. Raja, who had been its associate edi­
tor for five years, was told either to change policy or quit. He quit. 
I said we had to tolerate locally owned newspapers that criticized us; 
we accepted their bona fides, because they had to stay and suffer the 
consequences of their policies. Not so "the birds of passage who run the 
Straits Times": They would run to Malaya from where they would proclaim 
their readiness to die for the freedom of the press in Singapore. They used 
their most senior local man, Leslie Hoffman, a Eurasian, to rebut me: "I 
am no bird of passage. I, who am responsible for the policy and editorial 
content of this newspaper, intend to remain in Singapore, even if Mr. Lee 
and the People's Action Party came to power, and even if they use the 
Preservation of Public Security Ordinance against me .... My home will 
be in Singapore." 
Brave words indeed. Before polling day, Hoffman had left for Kuala 
Lumpur. A few days earlier, addressing an IPI (International Press Institute) 
annual assembly in West Berlin, he said that my threats were "the out­
pourings of a group of power-mad politicians." He claimed the Straits 
Times was "written, produced and controlled by Malayans who were born 
there, who had been there all their lives and who are genuine in their 
nationalism and loyalty to their country." He knew this was totally 
untrue. He called upon the IPI "to stop once and for all an attempt by a 
party to get popular support and backing for its declared intention to cur­
tail press freedom." That was exactly what we had the right to do, to seek 
a mandate to deal firmly with foreign, in this case colonial, interests in 
the press. It was our declared policy that newspapers should not be owned 
by foreigners. 
188 From Third World to First 
We won the election. The Straits Times, its owners and senior editors 
moved to Kuala Lumpur. They proved our point that they were cowardly, 
out to preserve British interests, not to uphold press freedom or the right 
to information. After we became independent in 1965, the Straits Times 
moved back to Singapore, did a complete turnaround and supported the 
PAP. This did not increase my respect for it. When Malaysia's pro-Malay 
policies forced the Straits Times group to sell its Kuala Lumpur opera­
tions to UMNO, the ruling party, it was the PAP government that 
allowed the British shareholders to continue owning and publishing the 
newspaper in Singapore. Simmons came to make peace, and the paper 
became a purely commercial concern, now without a political agenda. 
Leslie Hoffman did not return to Singapore but settled in Australia. 
Because I wanted competition, I encouraged other newspapers to set 
up. Several did but failed. After more than a hundred years of British rule, 
the Straits Times dominated the market. The Singapore Standard had folded 
in the 1960s. A newspaper called the Eastern Sun was launched in 1966 by 
Aw Kaw, the son of one of the Tiger Balm Aw brothers, known more as a 
playboy than a serious newspaper baron. After secret negotiations with 
high-ranking officials of an agency of the People's Republic of China 
based in Hong Kong, they lent him S$3 million. It was repayable over 
five years, with interest at the ludicrous rate of 0.1 percent per annum. 
The undeclared condition was that the newspaper would not oppose the 
People's Republic of China on major issues and would remain neutral on 
minor ones. The Eastern Sun incurred heavy losses because of poor man­
agement. In 1968, it received a further subvention of S$600,000. In 
1971, we exposed this "black operation" funding by a foreign power. Aw 
Kow admitted it was true. His outraged and humiliated editorial staff 
resigned, and the paper closed down. 
The Singapore Herald was another black operation . This time the 
money came from a noncommunist source. It started in 1970 as a wholly 
foreign-owned newspaper employing Singaporean editors and local and 
foreign journalists. At the start I wondered why two foreigners, nominal 
owners, wanted to start an English-language newspaper to work up issues 
against the government through its editorials and its news presentation 
on matters like national service, press restraint, and freedom of speech. It 
was losing money. The ISO reported that the largest shareholder was a 
Managing the Media 189 
Hong Kong firm, Heeda & Company, a registered partnership with two 
dummy names. The paper soon exhausted its S$2.3 million working cap­
ital, and Chase Manhattan Bank in Singapore extended to it unsecured 
loans of S$1.8 million. Pressed for an explanation, the bank's chairman, 
David Rockefeller, phoned me from New York to claim that his second 
vice president and manager of his branch in Singapore was unaware of the 
bank's standing rule not to lend money to newspapers! I was skeptical. 
I queried the paper's newly appointed Singaporean editor who had 
put up the money in the name of Heeda & Company of Hong Kong. He 
said he thought I knew it was Donald Stephens, the Malaysian high com­
missioner to Canberra and former chief minister of the state of Sabah, 
Malaysia. I asked whether he believed Stephens, who had become Fuad 
Stephens after his conversion to Islam, would risk losing a million and a 
half dollars in a newspaper that took on the Singapore governme nt. He 
agreed this was difficult to believe. 
When I disclosed this conversation in a public speech in mid-May 
1971, Stephens, whom I knew well from our Malaysia days, wrote to me 
from Canberra: "I feel I should tell you that my only motive in putting 
money into the Herald is because I have been in the newspaper business 
before and because I believe Singapore to be a country where my invest­
ments would be safe .... I am not getting younger and I thought if I were 
to retire before very long I will be able to get a living out of my invest­
ments in the Herald. " He did not explain why he did not first inform me 
about his investment and seek my support and blessings. A newspaper 
influences the politics of a country. When a foreigner, British newspaper 
baron Roy Thomson, considered starting a newspaper in Singapore in the 
mid-l 960s, he first discussed it with me. I discouraged him because I did 
not want a foreigner not rooted in Singapore to decide our political 
agenda. 
As the Herald was running out of funds, a Hong Kong newspaper­
woman, Aw Sian, Aw Kow's sister but unlike him a serious business­
person, mysteriously came to the rescue with S$500,000. She was a hard­
headed woman who owned a Hong Kong Chinese newspaper. She 
produced to me receipts for the money she remitted, but had no share cer­
tificates. I asked whether she intended to put more money into the paper. 
She replied "no," and immediately left for Hong Kong. 
190 From Third World to First 
The Press Foundation of Asia, an affiliate of the International Press 
Institute, issued a statement asking us not to cancel the paper's license 
and invited me to speak at the IPI annual assembly at Helsinki in June 
1971. Before leaving for Helsinki, I cancelled the printing license of the 
Singapore Hera ld. 
Had I not attended, the assembly would have passed resolutions con­
demning Singapore in my absence. I stated my position on the role of the 
media in a new and young country like Singapore. I needed the media "to 
reinforce, not to undermine, the cultural values and social attitudes being 
inculcated in our schools and universities. The mass media can create a 
mood in which people become keen to acquire the knowledge, skills and 
disciplines of advanced countries. Without these, we can never hope to 
raise the standards of living of our people." 
I recounted how, with Singapore 's different races, languages, cultures, 
and religions, press reports and photographs had caused riots with loss of 
lives, and cited two examples . In the "jungle girl" riots in 1950, the 
Singapore Standard had headlined a report of a Dutch girl, converted to 
Islam by her Malay foster mother, kneeling before an image of the Virgin 
Mary. The anti-Chinese riots on Prophet Mohammed's birthday in July 
1964 resulted from a sustained campaign by a Malay newspaper, falsely 
alleging day after day that the Malay minority were oppressed by the 
Chinese majority. 
I said I did not accept that newspaper owners had the right to print 
whatever they liked. Unlike Singapore's ministers, they and their journal­
ists were not elected. My final words to the conference were: "Freedom of 
the press, freedom of the news media, must be subordinated to the over­
riding needs of Singapore, and to the primacy of purpose of an elected 
government. " I stayed resolutely polite in response to provocative ques­
tions. 
A few years later, in 1977, we passed laws to prohibit any person or 
his or her nominee from holding more than 3 percent of the ordinary 
shares of a newspaper, and created a special category of shares called man­
agement shares. The minister had the authority to decide which share­
holders would have management shares. He gave management shares to 
Singapore's four major local banks. They would remain politically neutral 
and protect stability and growth because of their business interests. I do 
Managing the Media 191 
not subscribe to the Western practice that allows a wealthy press baron to 
decide what voters should read day after day. 
In the 1980s, Western-owned English-language publications became a 
significant presence in Singapore. Our English-reading public was 
expanding with the teaching of English in our schools. We have always 
banned communist publications; no Western media or media organiza­
tion has ever protested against this. We have not banned any Western 
newspaper or journal. Yet they frequently refused us the right of reply 
when they misreported us. We decided in 1986 to enact a law to restrict 
the sale or distribution of foreign publications that had engaged in the 
domestic politics of Singapore. One of our tests for "engaging in the poli­
tics of Singapore " was whether, after they had misreported or slanted sto­
ries on Singapore, they refused to publish our reply. We did not ban them, 
only restricted the number of copies they sold. Those who could not buy 
copies could get them photocopied or faxed. This would reduce their 
advertising revenue but did not stop their reports from circulating. They 
could not accuse us of being afraid to have their reports read. 
The first publication to breach this law was the American weekly 
Time magazine. In an article in October 1986, it reported that an opposi­
tion MP had been found guilty by Singapore courts on charges of dispos­
ing of assets to defraud creditors and of giving false evidence. My press 
secretary sent a letter to correct three errors of fact in the report. Time 
refused to publish it and instead proposed two versions, both of which 
changed its meaning. My press secretary wanted the letter published 
unedited. When it refused, we restricted the sale of Time magazine from 
18,000 to 9,000 and then subsequently to 2,000 copies. After this, Time 
published our reply in full. We lifted the restriction--eight months later. 
The Asian Wall Street Journal (AWSJ) in December 1986 printed an 
untrue story about our proposed second securities market, SESDAQ 
(Stock Exchange of Singapore Dealing in Automated Quotation Systems). 
It alleged that the government was setting it up in order to dispose of dud 
government-owned companies to its citizens. The Monetary Authority of 
Singapore (MAS) wrote to rebut these false allegations. The A WSJ not 
only refused to print this letter but claimed its article was fair and accu-
192 From Third World to First 
rate, that such a dud company did exist and that our letter had defamed 
its correspondent. The MAS wrote again to point out further errors in the 
journal's letter, and asked it to name the dud company and to indicate 
which specific passages in our letter had defamed its correspondent. We 
asked that it publish the correspondence so that readers could judge for 
themselves. It refused to name the dud company or point out the suppos­
edly defamatory passages. In February 1987, the government restricted 
the A WS]'s circulation from 5,000 to 400 copies and released the letters 
between the MAS and the A WSJ. The Singapore newspapers published 
them. We invited the journal's correspondent to sue if he had indeed been 
defamed. He did not. 
To our amazement, a U.S. State Department spokesman, as reported 
m the A WSJ, expressed regret at the restrictions on both the A WSJ 
and Time magazine. Our ministry of foreign affairs asked the State 
Department to confirm the reported remarks which, if true, represented 
"an unprecedented interference in Singapore's internal affairs." Its spokes­
man did so, but maintained the U.S. government did not take sides in 
either of these two cases. We asked the State Department whether, on the 
same grounds of impartiali ty, it would express regret over the refusal of 
the A WSJ to publish the exchange of letters. The State Department 
repeated that it did not take sides; it was merely expressing concern 
because of its "fundamental and long-standing commitment to the prin­
ciples of a free and unrestricted press"-which meant that "the press is 
free to publish or not publish what it chooses however irresponsible or 
biased its actions may seem to be." 
Our ministry of foreign affairs pointed out that we were not obliged 
to follow U.S. laws on the press. Singapore had its own laws and reserved 
the right to reply to wrong reporting. Foreign publications had no right 
of sale and circulation in Singapore. We gave them this privilege, but on 
our terms, one of which was the right of reply. The State Department did 
not reply. 
Two weeks later, the A WSJ wrote to our ministry of communications 
and information offering to distribute its journal free of charge to all pay­
ing subscribers who had been deprived by its restriction. It was willing to 
"forego its sales revenue in the spirit of helping Singapore businessmen 
who had complained of lack of access to the journal." The ministry agreed, 
Managing the Media 193 
provided it left out the advertisements to prove that the journal's motive 
was not to increase circulation but to justify its higher advertisin g charges. 
It declined the offer, arguing that advertisements were an integral part of a 
paper, and that there would be additional costs and scheduling problems. 
We offered to defray one-half of the additional costs of removing the adver­
tisements. The A WSJ rejected our offer. We responded, "You are not inter­
ested in the business community getting information. You want the free­
dom to make money selling advertisements." It did not reply. 
In September 1987, American-owned Asiaweek cocked a snook at us. 
The press secretary to the minister for home affairs had written to point 
out errors in an article in its magazine. Asiaweek printed parts of this 
letter as an article ("A Distortion of Facts, You Say?"), attributing it to 
the press secretary. It not only deleted significant parts but added more 
than 470 words of its own, lengthening it by more than half, without 
the press secretary's consent and without disclosing this to its readers. The 
press secretary wrote to protest against this alteration of his letter and 
asked that his original and subsequent letters be published unaltered. 
Asiaweek refused. We restricted the magazine's circulation from 11,000 
copies to 500. A month later, it published the letters unaltered. We lifted 
the restriction, after a year. 
In December 1987, the American-owned Far Eastern Economic Review 
published an account of a meeting between me and the Catholic arch­
bishop of Singapore regarding the arrest of 22 persons involved in a 
Marxist conspiracy. The article was based on statements made by a rene­
gade priest who had not been present at the meeting. The Review alleged 
that I had called a press conference without the archbishop's knowledge, 
tricked him into attending it and prevented a comment by him from 
being publicized. It said the arrest constituted an attack on the Catholic 
Church. 
My press secretary wrote to ask why it published an article based on 
statements of a person not present at the meeting without checking the 
facts with the archbishop or me. The editor, Derek Davies, printed this 
letter but did not answer the question. We wrote to repeat the question. 
The editor printed the letter and added at the same time that what the 
priest had said was true. He claimed that a newspaper could legally print 
anything it wished, true or false, so long as it was able to quote a source 
194 From Third World to First 
who had actually made the statement. It was under no obligation to check 
its facts to satisfy itself as to the truthfulness of its source, or to verify the 
assertions with other witnesses, nor could it be held answerable for any 
lies and libels thereby published. Davies was brazen and defiant. We 
restricted the Review from 9,000 to 500 copies, and I took out a writ for 
libel against him and the weekly. 
He then published another letter from the renegade priest giving a 
new account of my meeting with the archbishop. We wrote to ask which 
of its two versions of the meeting was correct. The weekly printed an 
edited version of my press secretary's letter, suppressing much of it, 
claiming the subject matter was sub judice. However, when the Singapore 
government bought advertisement space in the Review for the letter, it 
was published, the sub judice excuse abandoned. 
I won my libel action in 1989 when Davies did not go into the wit­
ness box to give evidence and be cross-examined. Davies left the Review 
soon afterward. 
Before our issue with the A WSJ was settled, I was invited to speak to 
the American Society of Newspaper Editors at a meeting in Washington, 
D.C., in April 1988. I accepted. I quoted the U.S. State Department 's 
aide-memoire, "that where the media are free, the marketplace of ideas 
sorts the irresponsible from the responsible and rewards the latter," and 
pointed out that the U.S. model was not universally valid. The Philippine 
press was based on the U.S. model. It enjoyed all the freedoms but it had 
failed the Filipino people. "A partisan press helped Filipino politicians to 
flood the marketplace of ideas with junk, and confused and befuddled the 
people so that they could not see what their vital interests were in a devel­
oping country." I stated my position: 
Singapore's domestic debate is a matter for Singaporeans. We 
allow American journalists in Singapore in order to report Singa­
pore to their fellow countrymen. We allow their papers to sell in 
Singapore so that we can know what foreigners are reading about 
us. But we cannot allow them to assume a role in Singapore that 
the American media play in America, that is, that of invigilator, 
adversary and inquisiror of the administration. No foreign televi­
sion station had claimed the right to telecast its programmes in 
Managing the Media 
Singapore. Indeed America's Federal Communications Com­
mission regulations bar foreigners from owning more than 25 per­
cent of a TV or radio station. Only Americans can control a busi­
ness which influences opinion in America. Thus Rupert Murdoch 
took up US citizenship before he purchased the independent TV 
stations of the Metromedia group in 1985. 195 
Through these cases, Singaporeans realized that what the foreign 
press wanted was to sell their papers to our growing English-reading pub­
lic. They did this by being tendentious at the expense of the facts. 
Naturally they did not like their slanted articles straightened out. When 
they discovered that if they twisted our arm, we could tweak their noses 
in reply, biased reporting became less frequent. 
In July 1993, the Economist, an influential British weekly, published 
an article that criticized us for prosecuting a government officer and the 
editor and a reporter of a newspaper under the Official Secrets Act. We 
sent a letter to the editor to correct errors in the article. It published the 
letter, claiming it had "virtually not been touched, practically in full." 
But it left out a key sentence: "The government will not acquiesce in 
breaches of the Official Secrets Act, nor allow anyone to flout, challenge 
and gradually change the law, as has happened in Britain with Clive 
Ponting's case and Peter Wright's book, Spycatcher. " 
This was the whole point of the letter; we were not going to allow our 
press to challenge and gradually alter by precedent the law governing 
official secrets. The British press had succeeded in doing this when Clive 
Ponting, a civil servant, released secret information about the sinking 
during the Falklands war, of the Belgrano, an Argentinean warship, and 
when Wright, an Ml6 officer, broke their secrecy rules by publishing his 
book. We sent a letter asking the editor to remedy the omission. The edi­
tor quibbled and refused. We gazetted the publication and capped its circu­
lation at 7,500 copies. We made clear that circulation would be progres­
sively restricted and released the exchange of letters. Then the Economist 
published our letter, including this sentence. After a decent interval, we 
lifted the restriction. 
Apart from replying to attacks in the media itself, I was ready to meet 
my critics face to face. In 1990, Bernard Levin of the London Times wrote 
196 From Third World to First 
a bitter attack on me and criticized the Singapore judiciary. He alleged 
"misrule" and a "frenzied determination to allow no one in his realm to 
defy him." To sue Levin in England, where I was not widely known and 
<lid not have any voters, would have been pointless. Instead, I wrote to 
invite him to a live television debate in London on his allegations. Levin's 
editor replied that no television station would be interested. I had taken 
the precaution of first writing to the chairman of the BBC, my friend 
Marmaduke Hussey, who had agreed to provide half an hour and a neutral 
moderator. When I informed the London Times of this offer, the editor on 
Levin's behalf backed off, arguing that my response should be in the same 
medium in which Levin had attacked me, namely the Times. I wrote to 
regret Levin's unwillingness to confront me. When the Times refused to 
publish my letter, I bought a half-page advertisement in the British daily, 
the Independent. Interviewed on the BBC World Service, I said, "Where I 
come from, if an accuser is not prepared to face the person he has attacked, 
there is nothing more to be said." Levin has not written about Singapore 
or me since. 
In another instance, I readily agreed to a tape-recorded exchange with 
a vehement critic, William Safi.re, who, over many years, had repeatedly 
denounced me as a dictator like Saddam Hussein. In January 1999, when 
we were both at Davos, he questioned me for an hour. He wrote two arti­
cles in the New York Times based on the interview and also published the 
transcripts verbatim on the Times' Internet Web site. Singapore news­
papers reprinted his articles. From the recorded comments of Americans 
and others who read the full text on the Internet, I did not lose in the 
exchange. 
If we do not stand up to and answer our critics from the foreign 
media, Singaporeans, especially journalists and academics, will believe 
that their leaders are afraid of or unequal to the argument, and will lose 
respect for us. 
Advances in information technology, satellite broadcasting, and the 
Internet will enable Western media networks to saturate our domestic 
audience with their reports and views. Countries that try to block the use 
of IT will lose. We have to learn to manage this relentless flood of infor­
mation so that the Singapore government's point of view is not smothered 
by the foreign media. The turmoil in Indonesia and the disorders in 
Managing the Media 197 
Malaysia in 1998 following the currency crisis are examples of the promi­
nent role played by the foreign media networks, both electronic and 
print, in their domestic debate. We must work out ways to make sure that 
in the midst of this cacophony of voices, that of the Singapore govern­
ment is heard. It is important for Singaporeans to know the official posi­
tion of their government on major issues. 
15. Conduc tor of an Orchestra 
My ministers and I remained friends and political colleagues for three to 
four decades. Several of us had been together since we met as students in 
England to discuss the future of Malaya and Singapore, then returned 
home and worked together to build mass support in the trade unions and 
in the PAP. Our commitment to a common cause and to each other was 
deep. We had abiding political convictions, or we would not have under­
taken the risk of challenging both the British and the communists at the 
same time, and later the Malay Ultras. The strongest bonds that bound 
us were forged during our early struggles when often it looked like we'd 
be swept away by overwhelming forces. Differences on policy we kept 
within the cabinet until we had resolved them and reached a consensus. 
Then we would put forth a clear line which people could understand and 
accept. Once a decision had been made in the cabinet, we made a point of 
abiding by it. 
We knew each other's strong and weak points, and worked well as a 
team. When the old guard ministers were in agreement, the rest in the 
cabinet would usually concur. I had an easy relationship with my col­
leagues. I was able to put my views on matters within their portfolios 
without ruffling their feathers. At the end of the day, they knew that I 
would have to stand before the voters to persuade them to give us a man­
date for another term and I needed a convincing case to present. 
Running a government is not unlike conducting an orchestra. No 
prime minister can achieve much without an able team. While he himself 
200 From Third World to First 
need not be a great player, he has to know enough of the principal instru­
ments from the violin to the cello to the French horn and the flute, or he 
would not know what he can expect from each of them. My style was to 
appoint the best man I had to be in charge of the most important min­
istry at that period, usually finance, except at independence when defense 
became urgent. That man was Goh Keng Swee. The next best would get 
the next most important portfolio. I would tell the minister what I 
wanted him to achieve, and leave him to get on with the task; it was man­
agement by objective. It worked best when the minister was resourceful 
and could innovate when faced with new, unexpected problems. My 
involvement in their ministries would be only on questions of policy. 
All the same I had to know enough about their portfolios to intervene 
from time to time on issues I thought important-a fledgling airline, an 
airport extension , traffic jams, dispersal of communal enclaves, raising 
academic performance of our Malays, and law and order. Some interven­
tions were crucial, and things might have gone wrong had I not inter­
vened. Ultimately, responsibility for a government 's failure rests with the 
prime minister. 
Singapore Airlines at Changi Airport 
Any enterprise that promised growth and employment we had to nurture. 
I suspected that the Malaysians wanted to break up Singapore's joint air­
line with Malaysia called Malaysia-Singapore Airlines (MSA). The Tunku 
told the press in September 1968 that he was unhappy with Singapore's 
retention of all the foreign exchange earnings of MSA, the failure to estab­
lish engineering and other facilities in Kuala Lumpur, and the preponder­
ance of Singaporeans over Malaysians on the staff. 
I replied through the press that the agreement between the two gov­
ernments specifically required the airline to be operated "on the basis of 
sound commercial principles," that the foreign exchange earned was dis­
tributed in profits in accordance with the shares held, and that the facili­
ties and staff reflected the company's origin, namely Singapore. The real 
dispute was over flights to uneconomic Malaysian destinations, which we 
would not agree to unless the losses were borne by Malaysia. 
Conductor of an Orchestra 201 
This open quarrel came at a crucial time when Britain's commitment 
to the defense of Malaysia was coming to an end, and the Australian and 
New Zealand positions were undecided. Ghazali Shafie wrote to me about 
the dispute. He was an able if flamboyant permanent secretary of the 
Malaysian foreign ministry who had good access to the Tunku and Razak 
and had helped solve many difficulties when I was negotiating merger 
with them. I replied that the airline problem in itself was not all that 
important. But if we kept on bickering we would endanger our security 
because in the next 12 to 24 months the British, Australians, and New 
Zealanders would be deciding on their post-1971 defense position. I sug­
gested that he help get the two governments on a new approach, one of 
quiet, commonsense accommodation. That would encourage the British, 
Australians, and New Zealanders to continue some commitme nt after 
1971. Ghazali did help to moderate the public altercation. The airline 
carried on with a new chairman acceptable to both sides. But it was clear 
the Tunku wanted to split MSA and have their own airline to fly to their 
state capitals, so I agreed to help them build up workshops at Kuala 
Lumpur airport and to train their workers to repair the Fokker Friendship 
aircraft used on domestic routes. 
I took a personal interest in MSA. I knew the Malaysians wanted to 
bypass Singapore wherever possible after the breakup of this joint airline. 
With only Paya Lehar International Airport and the three RAF airfields at 
Changi, Tengah, and Seletar, all on our small island republic, we had 
nowhere to go except international. I had earlier told the airline's manage­
ment to build up international destinations. I regularly met our man in 
MSA, Lim Chin Beng, then the director of administration and customer 
services. A steady, reliable man with a good grasp of the airline industry, 
he was promoted to managing director in 1971. He too knew that the 
Malaysians wanted to break off and leave us without any flights to 
Malaysia except to Kuala Lumpur. He worked hard to get more landing 
rights on potentially profitable international routes. In the meantime, he 
had to keep up the morale of the pilots and workers and their confidence 
in the future of a Singapore-owned and Singapore-based airline. The 
chairman and managing director of the company faced perpetual pres­
sures from both the Malaysians and us, which only ended when the airline 
split up in October 1972 into Singapore Airlines (SIA) and Malaysia 
202 From Third World to First 
Airline System (MAS). We agreed that MAS would take over all the inter­
nal routes and SIA all the external routes. 
We got landing rights to Hong Kong in 1966, Tokyo and Sydney in 
1967, Jakarta and Bangkok in 1968. The most important destination was 
London but the British were reluctant to give us landing rights. In August 
1970, before leaving for the Non-Aligned Summit in Lusaka, I asked 
Ngiam Tong Dow, permanent secretary (communications), about the state 
of negotiations with the British for landing rights in London. When he 
said it was very difficult, I told him to let NTUC Secretary-General Devan 
Nair know this. I had earlier agreed to Devan's proposal that if the British 
negotiators were difficult, he would get the unions at the airport to apply 
pressure by going slow on servicing British aircraft. As soon as the NTUC 
mounted a go-slow on BOAC aircraft at Paya Lehar, the British high com­
missioner, Arthur de la Mare, came to see me at my office. I asked him to 
get his government to be reasonable. A British airline could land in 
Singapore but a Singapore airline was denied landing rights in London. 
Within weeks, we obtained landing rights in London, and flew on one of 
the main trunk routes of the world: London-Singapore-Sydney. This open­
ing enabled Singapore Airlines to go international. The fact that Edward 
Heath was then prime minister could have made it easier. 
At a dinner in July 1972, with all union leaders and top management 
present, and before SIA was launched, I spelled out the need for a 
Singapore airline to be competitive and self-supporting ; it would close 
down if it incurred losses. We could not afford to run an airline just to 
show the flag like other countries did. Right from the beginning, man­
agement and union clearly understood that their survival depended on 
being profitable. Cooperation between union and management helped 
Singapore Airlines succeed. 
Freed from constant bickering, SIA concentrated on its international 
routes and flew further afield year by year. By 1996 it had one of the 
largest and most modern Boeing and Airbus fleets in Asia, flying to 
nearly all continents. It was the most profitable airline in Asia, and for its 
size, one of the most profitable in the world. 
Central to SIA's growth was my decision to build Changi Airport. In 
February 1972, the cabinet had accepted the recommendation of a British 
Conductor of an Orchestra 203 
aviation consultant that we build a second runway at Paya Lebar, to be oper­
ational by 1977-1978. The Serangoon River would have to be diverted for 
this to be done. There were engineering problems because of the doubtful 
load-bearing qualities of the soil below the riverbed, but it would entail the 
lowest land acquisition costs and require the least resettlements. The report 
added that it would not be possible to have two runways ready by 1977 if 
we moved from Paya Lehar to a new airport on the former RAF base at 
Changi. Then came the October 1973 oil crisis. Air fares increased with the 
price of fuel and the world economy slowed down. I asked for a new assess­
ment, this time by American consultants. They recommended we keep to 
the planned schedule for Paya Lehar. I was not satisfied and wanted the 
option of moving to Changi reconsidered. 
I had flown over Boston's Logan Airport and been impressed that the 
noise footprint of planes landing and taking off was over water. A second 
runway at Paya Lebar would take aircraft right over the heart of Singapore 
city. A committee of senior officials again studied the alternativ e of build­
ing two runways at Changi by 1977 and recommended we stay with the 
Paya Lebar second runway. But once built, we would be saddled with the 
noise pollution for many years. I wanted a thorough reappraisal before 
giving up on Changi so I appointed Howe Yoon Chong, the chairman of 
the Port of Singapore Authority with a reputation as a bulldozer , to chair 
a top-level committee. 
When I was in Washington in April 1975, I received a letter from 
Keng Swee, who was acting prime minister in my absence. The commit­
tee believed the first Changi runway could be ready by 1980 and the sec­
ond by 1982, whereas the second Paya Lehar runway could only be ready 
by 1984 because of the need to divert the Serangoo n River and compact 
the soil of the riverbed. Saigon and South Vietnam had just fallen to the 
communists. Growth in Southeast Asia was likely to slow down as com­
munist insurgencies spread throughout the region. But to base decisions 
on a pessimistic scenario might well bring it about. I mulled over the 
problem for a couple of days. The new airport at Changi would cost us 
S$ l billion. We would still need to spend another S$400 million to 
expand Paya Lebar's passenger and freight-handling facilities between 
1975 and 1982. I sent Keng Swee a message to proceed. 
204 From Third World to First 
For an airport of that size, the building period was usually 10 years. We 
completed Changi Airport in six. We demolished hundreds of buildings, 
exhumed thousands of graves, cleared swamps, and reclaimed land from the 
sea. When it opened in July 1981, it was Asia's largest airport. We wrote off 
over S$800 million worth of investments in the old airport and spent S$1. 5 
billion on Changi, with two runways, the second ready by 1984. 
Changi is a beautiful site at the easternmost corner of the island. The 
approach to the city from the east coast runs along a new 20 kilometer 
(approximately 12 miles) expressway built on land reclaimed from the 
sea, with no problems of congestion, beautiful glimpses of the sea on one 
side, and vistas of HDB estates and private condominiums on the other. 
The airport and the pleasant 20-minute drive into the city made an excel­
lent introduct ion to Singapore, the best S$ l. 5 billion investme nt we ever 
made. It helped Singapore become the hub airport of the region. The 
competition is keen and relentless. Newer and grander airports in Hong 
Kong and Kuala Lumpur with state-of-the-art equipment require Changi 
to be upgraded and refurbished regularly to stay competitive. 
Two men played key roles in making Changi Airport a success. Howe 
Yoon Chong was forceful in executing policies. He had encouraged me to 
move the airport from Paya Lehar to Changi by assuring me he had a team 
that could do it in time. He did, with the resources of the Port of Singa­
pore Authority, its chief engineer, A. Vijiaratnam, and Lim Hock San, a 
promising officer who implemented the project and became director 
of civil aviation in 1980. When I was invited to open it ceremonially in 
1981, I asked Yoon Chong, then minister for defense, to go in my place. 
He deserved to have his name on the plaque. 
The other man who played a key role was Sim Kee Boon, the 
shrewdest of our permanent secretaries. He organized the management of 
the airport. Building a fine airport has been done by many wealthy coun­
tries using foreign contractors. The challenge is in running it so that pas­
sengers have a smooth and swift passage through customs, immigration, 
baggage collection, and transport into the city. If they have to make a 
connecting flight, then there must be facilities for rest, recreation, and 
work. Changi has all these-rest and shower rooms, a swimming pool, 
business and fitness centers, and a science discovery and amusement area 
fo�-children. As head of the Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore, Kee 
Conductor of an Orchestra 205 
Boon made Changi into a world-class airport, winning top ratings in trav­
ellers' magazines almost every year. 
Fighting Traffic Congestion 
By 1975, traffic jams at peak hours were unbearable. I had read a paper 
proposing that, to reduce congestion, we charge a fee for cars entering the 
central business district (CBD) at peak hours. I asked our officials to 
examine this idea. They found it feasible. They proposed gantries with 
notices to warn all motorists entering the Area Licensing System (ALS), 
which covered the CBD at a restricted time, to display a license on their 
windshields. I had the plan discussed publicly in the media for several 
months. We refined the proposals, for example, allowing cars with four 
passengers to go through without a license and settling for a charge of S$3 
per day, less if bought on a monthly basis. The plan eased rush hour traffic 
jams and was well received. 
I knew this was but a temporary respite. Incomes were rising and the 
number of cars registered yearly was rising exponentially. I believed the 
answer was to limit the growth of the car population to the rate the roads 
could take without massive traffic jams. No matter how many under­
ground passes, flyovers, and expressways we built, the car population 
would increase to clog them all up. 
I proposed that a new car owner had to bid for a certificate to pur­
chase and put the car on the road. The number of certificates available 
each year would depend on road capacity. We calculated that the roads 
then could accommodate a 3 percent annual increase of vehicles. The min­
ister for communications took a bill for this to a parliamentary select 
committee to hear all representations. We settled on a scheme whereby a 
person had to bid for a certificate of entitlement (COE) to use a new car 
for 10 years. 
It proved effective in limiting the yearly vehicle increase to 3 percent. 
Bids for COEs started low but soon rose to astronomical heights. In 1994, 
it exceeded S$ l 00,000 for a car of over 2,000 cc; this was in addition to 
other heavy import taxes. COEs became unpopular and endless letters to 
the newspapers by would-be car owners argued that the bids were being 
206 From Third World to First 
manipulated by car dealers and speculators. Responding to public 
requests, the government prohibited car dealers from bidding for COEs in 
their own names for transfer to their customers and also made the certifi­
cates nontransferable. These changes made no difference. When the econ­
omy boomed and the stock market rose, so did COE bids, and vice versa, 
as when Singapore suffered in the economic crisis of 1997-1998. 
By trial and error, I learned that if I wanted to get an important pro­
posal accepted at all levels, I should first float my ideas with my minis­
ters, who would then discuss them with the permanent secretaries and 
officials. After I got their reactions, I would have the proposal discussed 
among those who had to make it work. If, like the transport system, it 
concerned large numbers of people, I would then get the issue into the 
media for public discussion. Hence, before we decided on an underground 
mass rapid transit (MRT), we had a public debate for a year on the merits 
of an MRT as against an all-bus system using dedicated roads. We also 
had American consultants advise us on the two options. They convinced 
us that an all-bus system would not provide as satisfactory a solution, 
because in wet weather the buses would slow down and clog up the sys­
tem. This would not happen with trains. 
The MRT did not reduce the demand to own cars which increased 
every year although we slowed it down with COEs and the ALS. In 1998, 
we introduced electronic road pricing (ERP). Every vehicle now has a 
"smart card" at its windshield, and the correct toll is automatically 
deducted every time it passes under gantries sited at strategic points in 
the city. The toll amount varies with the stretch of road that is used and 
the time of day. Technology has made it possible to fine-tune the ALS sys­
tem and extend it to all roads that have become congested. Since the 
amount people pay the government now depends upon how much they 
use the roads, the optimum number of cars can be owned with the mini­
mum of congestion. 
Delicate Malay Issues 
Some sensitive matters, however, could not be publicly debated. One such 
issue was what to do with the concentrations of Malays in poor conditions 
Condu ctor of an Orchestra 207 
that from colonial days had existed in and beyond what the British had des­
ignated as "Malay settlements." At separation in August 1965, the Tunku 
had offered free land in Johor to Singapore Malays who felt abandoned. Few 
took up his offer. But their segregation had contributed to isolation and 
disaffection because these settlements tended to be depressed areas that 
had become ghettos: muddy, winding, unpaved lanes between shanty huts 
of wood with zinc or thatched roofs. The most troubling concentration 
was in Geylang Serai, which together with Kampong Ubi and Kampong 
Kembangan formed the biggest Malay settlement where over 60,000 
Malays lived in poor conditions with no piped water or sanitation. People 
collected water from public standpipes sited on the side of lanes and carried 
it home in buckets or paid a water carrier to do so. There was no power sup­
ply although some private operators sold electricity illegally. In September 
1965, one month after separation, I told residents that in 10 years all their 
shacks would be demolished and Geylang Serai would be another and a bet­
ter "Queenstown, " then our most modern high-rise housing estate. 
We kept this promise. As part of our long-term plan to rebuild 
Singapore and rehouse everybody, we decided to scatter and mix Malays, 
Chinese, Indians, and all others alike and thus prevent them from congre­
gating as they had been encouraged to do by the British. On resettlement, 
they would have to ballot for their new high-rise homes. 
Meanwhile, to prevent another ugly situation from arising should 
there be another race riot, I decided to extend, in waffle-grid fashion, four 
roads that went through the Geylang Serai Malay settlement area, at the 
same time widening the existing lanes and lighting up the highways. In 
six to seven years, one large ghetto became nine small pockets. The most 
difficult part was the initial resettlement which began in February 1970. 
When we announced it, there was apprehension among the Malay resi­
dents. Our Malay MPs played a critical role in mediating between gov­
ernment officials and residents. The press and radio helped to publicize 
the government's compensation package and the alternative accommo­
dation offered. By then the Utusan Melayu had ceased to circulate in 
Singapore and could not work up unfounded fears as it had done in 1964 
over the resettlement at Crawford. 
The most politically sensitive building to remove was a dilapidated 
surau (a small mosque). Every house of worship, however insignificant, 
208 From Third World to First 
had a committee of religious elders and activists who collected tithes and 
donations for its maintenance. When the time came for the surau to be 
demolished, they squatted in the premises and refused to leave. They read 
the government's actions as anti-Islam. Our Malay MPs arranged a meet­
ing in September 1970 at City Hall, where my office was, for the surau 
committee and members to make their representations to senior officials 
from the Public Works Department and the Housing and Development 
Board. With the help of our Malay MPs, we persuaded them to allow the 
old wooden building to be demolished, giving them the assurance that a 
new one would be built close to the existing site. The next day, our Malay 
MPs and the president of MUIS, the Muslim governing body for 
Singapore, addressed some 200 of the congregation at the surau after 
Friday prayers. Our Malay MP, Rahmat Kenap, a doughty former trade 
union leader who had been unshaken when roundly denounced during the 
1964 race riots as a kafir or infidel by UMNO leaders, reassured the con­
gregation with the government's pledge to build a new mosque to replace 
an existing one. They finally agreed to move out. This paved the way for 
the demolition and rebuilding of some 20 other small mosques in the set­
tlement. We offered them alternative sites and found a solution for 
financing their new mosques. I gave MUIS the responsibility for building 
replacement mosques and set up for them a building fund which received 
S$ l per month from each Muslim worker through our CPF system. This 
gave our Malays pride in building their mosques with their own funds. 
Moving the house owners was less difficult. They were given compen­
sation at set rates, according to whether the houses were built with or 
without government approval, plus a "disturbance allowance" of S$350 
per family, which at the time was more than a month's salary for a laborer. 
They were given priority in the new housing estates and the freedom to 
choose the locality of their new homes. In spite of all these concessions, a 
group of 40 families refused to vacate their premises until we brought 
them to court. 
When the roads were finally completed and brightly lit I was greatly 
relieved as I drove through the area one night, happy at the visibly 
improved security and social ambience . After Geylang Serai, it was easier 
to integrate the other Malay settlements. 
Condu ctor of an Orchestra 209 
Although we mixed the races by making them ballot for their homes, 
we found that they were collecting together again. When owners sold 
their apartments and were able to buy resale apartments of their choice, 
they soon recongregated. This forced us in 1989 to put percentage limits 
(2 5 percent for Malays, 13 percent for Indians and other minorities at the 
block level) beyond which no minority family could move into the neigh­
borhood. 
This quota ceiling limited the pool of buyers for certain resale apart­
ments and so depressed their prices. When a Malay or Indian is not 
allowed to sell to a Chinese because the Chinese quota has already been 
filled, the apartment invariably sells at a price lower than the market rate 
because the smaller numbers of Malay or Indian buyers are not able to pay 
the higher price that the Chinese majority can. However, this is a small 
cost for achieving our larger objective of getting the races to intermingle. 
Dhanabalan, an Indian, as minister in charge of the HDB, Jayakumar, 
minister for law, another Indian, and Ahmad Mattar, minister for the 
environment, a Malay of Arab descent, fully agreed with me that to allow 
resegregation would be retrograde and would reverse what we had 
achieved. Our other Malay and Indian MPs also shared this view. This 
made it easier to implement this policy. 
When this task was completed by the 1980s, I decided it would be 
necessary to change the election laws to have joint candidates contesting 
two or more constituencies. After much discussion in cabinet, we took the 
matter to Parliament. Three or four single-member constituencies were 
amalgamated into single group representation constituencies (GRCs) to 
be contested by three or four candidates as a group or team which had to 
include one candidate from a minority community, an Indian or Malay. 
Without this arrangement, the Chinese majority in all constituencies 
would most likely return Chinese candidates. In the 1950s and 1960s, 
people had voted for the party symbol, regardless of the candidate 's race. 
In the 1980s, after the PAP had established itself as the dominant party 
and was seen as likely to be returned in office, people voted more for the 
MP than for the party. They preferred one who empathized with them, 
spoke the same dialect or language and was of the same race. All candi­
dates who have campaigned know this only too well. It was going to be 
210 From Third World to First 
difficult if not impossible for a Malay or Indian candidate to win against a 
Chinese candidate. To end up with a Parliament without Malay, Indian, 
and other minority MPs would be damaging. We had to change the rules. 
One advantage of a GRC is that Chinese candidates cannot make Chinese 
chauvinist appeals without losing the 25 to 30 percent non-Chinese vote. 
They need a Malay or an Indian who can win over the minority votes to be 
a member of their GRC team of candidates. 
Another racially sensitive problem that troubled me was the consistently 
poorer performance in mathematics and science of a larger percentage of 
Malay students compared to other students. I decided that we could not 
keep these differences in examination results secret for long. To have peo­
ple believe all children were equal, whatever their race, and that equal 
opportunities would allow all to qualify for a place in a university , must 
lead to discontent. The less successful would believe that the govern­
ment was not treating them equally. In 1980, I brought the Malay com­
munity leaders into my confidence in order to tackle the problem of 
Malay underachievement openly and sensitively . I provided the leaders, 
including newspaper editors, with the examination results for the previ­
ous 10 to 15 years and highlighted the fact that the same differences in 
results had existed in British colonial Singapore before the war. It was 
not something new. 
After the community and media leaders had got over their initial 
shock, we invited them to seek solutions with the government's full sup­
port. I told them of studies that showed a 15 to 20 percent improvement 
in student performance when the parents and students were motivated to 
make that extra effort. Their reaction was positive. In 1982, the Malay 
leaders with the assurance of government support formed Mendaki 
(Majlis Pendidikan Anak-Anak Islam-Council on Education for Muslim 
Children), with representatives from Malay social, literary, and cultural 
bodies and PAP Malay MPs. We provided them with the premises. As 
with the mosque building fund, to finance Mendaki we deducted 50 cents 
from each Malay's monthly CPF contribution. The contributions in­
creased gradually, with increased incomes, to S$2.50. The government 
matched it dollar for dollar. 
Condu ctor of an Orchestra 211 
I invariably consulted my Malay colleagues including Othman Wok 
and Rahim Ishak before deciding on policies affecting the Malays. Both 
were practical in their outlook. I also consulted Yaacob Mohamed when 
Islamic issues were involved. He had been a preacher in Kelantan and was 
well respected as a man of some religious learning. Ahmad Mattar was a 
realist and accepted this as the best way to get results. 
Not all my older ministers were comfortable with this move toward 
community-based self-help groups. Raja was the most strongly opposed 
to it. He was a total multiracialist and saw my plan not as a pragmatic 
acceptance of realities, but as backsliding. He did not want to use natural 
racial bonds to reach out to parents who could best motivate their chil­
dren. He feared the risk of strengthening communal pulls. 
While I shared Raja's ideal of a completely color-blind policy, I had to 
face reality and produce results. From experience, we knew that Chinese 
or Indian officials could not reach out to Malay parents and students in 
the way their own community leaders did. The respect these leaders 
enjoyed and their sincere interest in the welfare of the less successful per­
suaded parents and children to make the effort. Paid bureaucrats could 
never have the same commitment, zest, and rapport to move parents and 
their children. Chinese community leaders could not reach out to Malay 
parents and their children. On such personal-emotional issues involving 
ethnic and family pride, only leaders of the wider ethnic family can reach 
out to the parents and their children. 
A few years after Mendaki got into its stride, the efforts of Malay 
community leaders plus the extra tuition in the evenings showed in a 
steady increase in the number of Malay students passing their examina­
tions, with substantial progress in mathematics. In 1991, a group of 
young Muslim graduates formed the Association of Muslim Professionals 
(AMP). They had objectives similar to Mendaki's but wanted to work 
independently of the government. Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong 
encouraged them with financial support. With more of their own com­
munity leaders helping the less successful Muslim youths, the results 
improved. 
Our Malay students scored higher than the international average in 
the Third International Mathematics and Science study in 1995. Of the 
1987 cohort of Malay students, only 7 percent made it to polytechnics 
212 From Third World to First 
and universities. By 1999, this figure had quadrupled to 28 percent while 
the national percentage had only doubled. A Malay girl on scholarship 
graduated summa cum laude in English at Berkeley, California, in 1996. 
One Malay student topped his graduating architecture class in 1999 at 
NUS winning a gold medal. Another won a government scholarship to 
Cambridge where he obtained First Class Honours in physics and went on 
to take his Ph.D. in 1999. And a Malay was elected president of the 
Student Union at NTU in 1998-1999. We now have a growing Malay 
middle class of managing directors of MN Cs, IT consultants and start-up 
entrepreneurs, forex dealers, bank managers, engineers, lawyers, doctors, 
and businessmen in tourism, food, contracting, furniture, and clothing 
trades. 
The progress achieved by Mendaki encouraged the Indian community 
to form the Singapore Indian Development Association (SINDA) in 
1991. The following year, the Chinese formed the Chinese Development 
Assistance Council (CDAC) to help their weaker students, smaller in per­
centage terms than the Malay underachievers but larger in total number. 
The Eurasian Association soon did likewise. 
Rule of Law 
Law and order provide the framework for stability and development. 
Trained in the law, I had imbibed the principle of equality of all before 
the law for the proper functioning of a society. However, my experience of 
life in Japanese-occupied Singapore, followed by a disorderly period when 
the British Military Administration tried to reestablish the rule of law, 
made me pragmatic, not ideological, in my approach to problems of 
crime and punishment. 
After being called to the Singapore Bar in 1951, my first case was to 
defend four rioters charged with the murder of an RAF sergeant during 
the "jungle girl" Muslim riots against whites in December 1950. I got all 
four men acquitted, but it left me with grave doubts about the practical 
value of the jury system for Singapore . Seven men, deciding by majority 
verdict, made for easy acquittals. The jury system had also been tried in 
Conductor of an Orchestra 213 
India, failed, and was abolished. Soon after I became prime minister in 
1959, I abolished the jury system for all cases except murder. I retained 
this exception to keep in line with the law in Malaya at that time. In 
1969, after separation from Malaysia, I asked Eddie Barker as minister for 
law to move a bill in Parliament abolishing the jury system for murder 
trials. During a parliamentary select committee meeting, David Marshall, 
then our most successful criminal lawyer, claimed he had 99 acquittals 
out of the 100 cases he defended for murder. When I asked if he believed 
the 99 acquitted had been wrongly charged, Marshall replied his duty was 
to defend them, not judge them. 
A Straits Times court reporter who had watched many jury trials gave 
evidence to the same select committee that superstitious beliefs and a 
general reluctance to take responsibility for severe punishment, especially 
the death sentence, made Asian jurors most reluctant to convict. They 
preferred acquittal or conviction on a lesser charge. The reporter said he 
could predict that whenever a pregnant woman was a member of the jury 
there would be no conviction on a murder charge, for otherwise her child 
would be born cursed. After the bill was passed and jury trials were abol­
ished, there were fewer miscarriages of justice arising from the vagaries of 
jury sentiments. 
After what I had seen of human conduct in the years of deprivation 
and harshness of Japanese occupation, I did not accept the theory that a 
criminal is a victim of society. Punishment then was so severe that even in 
1944-1945, when many did not have enough to eat, there were no bur­
glaries and people could leave their front doors unlocked , day or night. 
The deterrent was effective. The British used to have whipping with a 
cat-o' -nine-tails or rattan in Singapore. After the war, they abolished 
whipping but retained caning (with rattan). We found caning more effec­
tive than long prison terms and imposed it for crimes related to drugs, 
arms trafficking, rape, illegal entry into Singapore, and vandalizing of 
public property. 
In 1993, a 15-year-old American schoolboy , Michael Fay, and his 
friends went on a spree, vandalizing road and traffic signs and spray­
painting more than 20 cars. When charged in court, he pleaded guilty 
and his lawyer made a plea for leniency. The judge ordered six strokes of 
214 From Third World to First 
the cane and four months in jail. The American media went berserk at the 
prospect of an American boy being caned on his buttocks by cruel Asians 
in Singapore. They raised so much heat that U.S. President Clinton 
appealed to President Ong Teng Cheong to pardon the teenager. Singa­
pore was placed in an impossible position. If we did not cane this boy 
because he was American, how could we cane our own offenders ? 
After discussion in cabinet, the prime minister advised President Ong 
to reduce the sentence to four strokes. 
The American media was not satisfied. However, not all Americans 
disapproved of Singapore's punishment for vandalism. While driving in 
New Hampshire soon after the Michael Fay story hit the headlines , my 
daughter Ling was arrested for not stopping when a police car flashed its 
blue light at her for speeding. The police officer was taking her to the 
police lockup when she said in reply to his questioning that she came 
from Singapore and that he probably disapproved of her country because 
of the Fay case. He said the boy deserved the caning, drove her back co her 
car, and wished her good luck. 
Fay survived the four strokes and returned to America. A few months 
later the American press reported that he came home late and intoxicated 
one night and charged at his father, bringing him down in a scuffle. A 
month later he was badly burnt sniffing butane when a friend struck a 
match. He admitted that he had been a butane addict while in Singapore. 
These measures have made for law and order in Singapore. Singapore 
was rated No. 1 by the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness 
Report 1997, as a country where "organised crime does not impose signif­
icant costs on businesse s." The International Institute for Management 
Development in their World Competitiveness Yearbook 1997 also rated 
Singapore No. 1 for security, "where there is full confidence among people 
that their person and property is [sic} protected." 
Small Steps Toward IT 
The digital revolution is changing the way we live and work. The Internet 
and its multiple offspring will require all who want to be in the main­
stream of the new economy to be computer-Internet literate. 
Conductor of an Orchestra 215 
I was an early enthusiast of the use of computers, which became an 
important factor in increasing our productivi ty. In 1973, when my son, 
Loong, completed his Mathematics Tripos II at Cambridge, I encouraged 
him to do a postgraduate course in computer science because I thought it 
a valuable tool for calculations and storing data. I also asked the Public 
Service Commission to offer outstanding students postgraduate courses in 
computers. One of them, Teo Chee Hean, as minister for education in 
1997, started a program for teachers to use computers as a teaching tool 
with one computer for every two students. 
In 1984, I decided that the government would pay all employees 
through GIRO. Many clerical and manual workers preferred to receive 
cash, saying they did not want their wives to know their pay. I met these 
objections by opening Post Office Savings Bank (POSBank) accounts for 
them so that they could draw cash from automatic teller machines. This 
did away with police escorts for transporting cash on pay days, twice a 
month. The private sector followed suit. We then encouraged the pay­
ment of taxes and license fees by GIRO. 
But while I spearheaded the early drive for computerization and pay­
ments by electronic transfer, I did not myself use a PC although they had 
become common. When the younger ministers e-mailed each other in the 
mid-l 990s, I had my e-mail printed out and responded by fax. 
Left "out of the loop," I decided at the age of 72 to take instructions. 
For the greying generation, it was not easy. It was many months before I 
could work my MS Word and e-mail without help every now and again 
from my secretaries. Even much later I would lose a file into a black hole 
because I had clicked on the wrong icon. Or the PC would accuse me of 
having "performed an illegal operation " and threaten to shut down. At 
the office my secretaries would help out. At home, I would ring up 
Loong, who after listening to my tale of woe, would guide me step by step 
on the phone to retrieve my hours of hard work that had been lost. When 
this failed Loong would come on Sunday to search through my C drive for 
the missing file or to solve some other mystery. It was more than a year 
before I was comfortable with my PC. One benefit was the ease with 
which I could amend and rearrange sentences and whole paragraphs on 
screen when writing this book. Now I would not travel without my lap­
top to access my e-mail. 
216 From Third World to First 
A Chief Justice-A President 
Selecting the right man for key constitutional positions, like the chief 
justice and the president of the republic, is vital. A wrong choice could 
mean years of public embarrassment and endless problems. It is easier to 
decide who is the ablest than to predict who has the character to mea­
sure up to the job. I knew both the chief justice and the president inti­
mately for many years before their appointments. One was an unquali­
fied success; the other was an unfortunate accident that could have been 
avoided. 
The chief justice sets the tone of the judiciary. When we were about 
to join Malaysia in August 1963, the last British chief justice, Sir Alan 
Rose, retired in order to allow me to nominate the first Singaporean chief 
justice. For this appointment, I looked for someone with a philosophy of 
society that was not at odds with mine. The inarticulate major premises of 
the chief justice and his understanding of the objectives of a good govern­
ment are of vital importance. 
I had one memorable exchange with Sir Alan. When several commu­
nist rioters were to be tried in our courts in the early 1960s, I feared that 
their case would be heard by an expatriate British judge who might be 
insensitive to the political feelings of the time. I asked to see the chief jus­
tice and explained to him that the government would be vulnerable to the 
charge of being a stooge of the British government if this were to happen. 
He looked at me quizzically and said, "Prime Minister, when I was chief 
justice in Ceylon I had to act as officer administering the government in 
place of the governor-general. He was away during a period of turmoil. 
You need have no fear that you will be embarrassed ." He understood the 
need for political sensitivity . 
It was with some care that I chose Wee Chong Jin to be the new chief 
justice. He was then a high court judge appointed by a British governor. 
He came from a middle-class background, was Cambridge-educated like 
me, a Catholic, and an anticommunist. He was strong on law and order. 
Sir Alan recommended him as having the firmness to keep discipline in 
the courts and have them follow the norms he set. 
He remained chief justice till the age of 72 in 1990. I had extended 
his term beyond his retirement age of 65 because I could not find a suit-
Conductor of an Orchestra 217 
able successor. Wee knew his law and presided with authority in his 
courts both at first instance and on appeals. Cast in the mold of chief 
justices of the British era, he concentrated primarily on his judgments 
and the workings of the Supreme Court but did not give as much atten­
tion to the lower courts or to the workings of the judicial system as a 
whole. Because of a great increase in litigation, the old system, both in 
the lower and higher courts, had become congested. The wheels of jus­
tice turned slowly, work piled up, and cases took 4 to 6 years to come to 
trial. It was nearly as slow in the lower courts which handled the major­
ity of cases. 
I had decided in 1988 to resign as prime minister at the end of 1990. 
Knowing that my successor, Goh Chok Tong, had no association with the 
legal profession and would have difficulty deciding on a suitable chief jus­
tice, I searched for the right person to appoint before I stepped down. I 
met all the judges separately and got each one of them to list for me, in 
order of merit, three persons whom he considered suitable for the office, 
excluding himself. Then with each judge, I went through the list of mem­
bers of the bar; we also considered outstanding lawyers from the Malaysian 
Bar. Four judges, A. P. Rajah, P. Coomaraswamy, L. P. Thean, and S. K. 
Chan, placed Yong Pung How first on their list, rating him the best. 
Pung How was then chairman of the Oversea-Chinese Banking 
Corporation (OCBC), the largest Singapore bank. After the 1969 Kuala 
Lumpur race riots, he had left a thriving law practice of which he was a 
senior partner and moved with his family to Singapore where he became 
chairman of a new merchant bank. 
We had been fellow students at the Cambridge Law School for three 
years and I knew the quality of his work. I had borrowed his lecture notes 
for the 1946 September term which I had missed. They were comprehen­
sive and orderly and gave me a good synopsis of the lectures. Six months 
later, in June 1947, I took a First in the first-year law examinations ; so 
did Pung How. We kept in touch after we returned home. In the late 
1960s, he was appointed chairman of Malaysia-Singapore Airlines by the 
two governments that jointly owned it. I renewed close interaction with 
him when he was seconded by the OCBC in 1981 to be managing direc­
tor of the Government Investment Corporation which we had formed to 
manage and invest Singapore's reserves. He was thorough, meticulous, 
218 From Third World to First 
and scrupulously fair in his presentation of the alternatives for an invest­
ment, although he expressed his preferences. This was an important judi­
cial quality. 
I had offered to make him a judge of the Supreme Court in 1976 
when he was vice chairman of the OCBC; he declined. Over lunch in early 
1989, I asked him to consider becoming chief justice. My argument was 
that he had already reached the top position in our biggest bank and his 
efforts there could only benefit several thousand employees and many 
more shareholders. As chief justice he would be able to bring the adminis­
tration of justice up to date and bring untold benefits to the whole society 
and our economy. If he agreed, he would first have to be a Supreme Court 
judge for a year to get himself back into the law before he took up the 
appointment as chief justice. He asked for time to think it over. It would 
mean a change of lifestyle. He would also lose financially . In the bank, he 
was paid over S$2 million a year; as a judge, he would earn less than 
S$300,000, one-seventh of his banker's remuneration. After a month, he 
accepted my offer out of a sense of duty; Singapore had given him his sec­
ond home. 
I made him a judge of the Supreme Court on 1 July 1989, and in 
September 1990, when Chief Justice Wee retired, I appointed Yong Pung 
How chief justice. He had suffered through the years of Japanese occupa­
tion and experienced the race riots in Malaysia. He also had strong views 
on the administration of the law co ensure order in society. His views on a 
multiracial society and how it should be nurtured and governed and his 
approach to law and order in such a society in chis pare of the world were 
not different from mine. 
He understood that to cope with the new workload, antiquated prac­
tices had to be abandoned and new procedures adopted co deal with all 
cases with dispatch, in the lowest co the highest courts. I suggested that 
he personally visit the lower courts, even sit with the magistrates and dis­
trict judges co have first-hand knowledge of their work, assess their capa­
bilities, tighten up the system, and bring in additional talent. Work dis­
cipline needed to be restored. Lawyers had complained co me chat several 
magistrates and district judges would leave their cars just outside the city 
limits co avoid paying the small fee charged during peak hours. After the 
Conductor of an Orchestra 219 
licensing period was over they would adjourn their courts and drive their 
cars into the city center. Such was the slackness of the system. 
Yong Pung How turned out to be an outstanding chief justice. He 
gave leadership to the judges and set a high tone for the bar. Within a few 
years he had reformed and updated the courts and their procedures, and 
reduced the backlog and the delays in cases awaiting trial. He amended 
the rules and practices that lawyers took advantage of to procrastinate and 
postpone their cases. To cope with the increased litigation he recom­
mended the appointment of additional judges of the Supreme Court and 
as many judicial commissioners (senior lawyers discharging the duties of a 
judge) as the work required. His selection methods were systematic and 
fair. After meeting a large cross section of lawyers who were recognized as 
leading members of the bar, he shortlisted 20 and sought the assessments 
of each of the existing judges and judicial commissioners on their overall 
integrity, legal ability, and likely "judicial temperament. " Then he made 
his recommendations to the prime minister. 
For appointments to the Court of Appeal, he asked each judge and 
judicial commissioner to name two of their number whom he thought the 
most suitable, excluding himself. The two he finally recommended were 
the unanimous choice of all their peers. His methods, known to all the 
judges and senior lawyers, raised the standing and prestige of all judges 
and judicial commissioners. 
He introduced information technology into the courts to speed up 
their work; lawyers can now file their court documents and make searches 
through their computers. By 1999, the reputation of our courts brought 
visits by judges and chief justices from developing as well as developed 
countries to study his reorganization. The World Bank recommended 
Singapore's system, both at high court and subordinate court levels, for 
other countries to learn from. 
World rating agencies have given Singapore high marks for its judi­
cial system. Throughout the 1990s, the World Competitiveness Yearbook 
published by the Swiss-based Institute for Management Development 
placed Singapore at the top in Asia for "confidence in the fair administra­
tion of justice in the society." For 1997-1998, it put Singapore within the 
top 10 globally, ahead of the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, 
220 From Third World to First 
and most OECD countries. From 1995, when it began racing the legal 
systems in Asia, the Hong Kong-based Political and Economic Risk 
Consultancy raced Singapore's judicial system as the best in Asia. 
I was less fortunate in my choice of the president. I had worked with 
Devan Nair since 1954, when I moved his election as president in 
Parliament in 1981. In the afternoon of 15 March 1985, I was shocked 
when cold chat Devan had acted in a bizarre manner while visiting 
Kuching in Sarawak, an Ease Malaysian scare. The Sarawak scare physician 
had phoned Nair's personal physician , Dr. J. A. Tambyah, on 14 March co 
ask him co cake the president back because of his behavior. Nair had been 
uninhibited with women, including the wife of an assistant minister who 
accompanied him in a car, women at dinners, and nurses who looked after 
him. He outraged their modesty, propositioned chem, fondled, and 
molested chem. After informing our director of medical services, Dr. 
Tambyah flew at once co Kuching, where he found Nair had collapsed and 
lost control of himself, and accompanied him back on 15 March. 
Thar same evening, at about 9:00 P.M., I saw Mrs. Nair at the Iscana 
Lodge. To help me break the unhappy news, I brought Choo who knew 
her well. My note co the cabinet the following day read: 
Mrs Nair was collected and could barely suppress her disgust and 
anger at the news chat Devan had misbehaved in Kuching and 
collapsed. She cold my wife and me chat Devan was a changed 
man, chat he had been drinking heavily from time co time, and 
for the lase few months had consumed a bottle of whisky every 
night. She had sent the servants off early so chat they would not 
know chat he would gee totally drunk and incapable, when he 
would often beat her. She knew chis would happen in Sarawak 
and had refused co go. 
In the weeks before his Sarawak visit, Devan Nair had been 
driving a car alone out of the Iscana. He had disguised himself 
with a wig and had gone our without his security officer or his 
driver co meet a German woman. One morning, after he had been 
out for the night, Mrs Nair went to Changi Cottage co check. She 
Conductor of an Orchestra 
discovered liquor bottles, glasses with lipstick marks and ciga­
rettes. Devan Nair had also brought the German woman to the 
Istana Lodge for dinner. When Mrs Nair remonstrated, there was 
a row and he had beaten her. He was not in control of himself and 
his temper in his drinking bouts. 221 
Seven of our best specialists examined and treated him. The most 
senior of them, a psychiatrist, Dr. R. Nagulendran, in a report of 23 
March wrote, "He (Nair) suffers from ALCOHOLISM [sic} characterised 
by many years of alcohol consumption ; periodic bouts of heavy and con­
tinuous drinking ; psychological dependence on alcohol; lapses of mem­
ory; intermittent hallucinations; impotency ; personality changes; disrup­
tion of matrimonial harmony." 
Under the constitution, the president could not be charged for any 
crime. If the president killed someone while driving under the influence of 
alcohol, there would be public outrage. The cabinet discussed these devel­
opments at several meetings and decided that he had to resign before he was 
discharged from the hospital and could resume his activities, or Parliament 
would have to remove him from office. The old ministers, especially Raja, 
Eddie Barker, and I, were upset at having to remove an old colleague from 
so prominent a public office. We felt keenly for his family but concluded 
that we had no choice; leaving him in office would cause greater harm. 
On 27 March, when he had recovered sufficiently to understand the 
implications of what he had done, Raja and I saw him at the Singapore 
General Hospital. After some hesitation, he agreed to resign. 
The following day, 28 March, Nair wrote to me: "About a year ago, I 
knew myself for a confirmed alcoholic. It was only then that the DECEP­
TION [sic} began. I occasionally thought of confiding in you, but put 
things off in cowardly fashion. The last time I was on the verge of confid­
ing in you was when we met some two weeks ago in my office, before I 
left for Kuching. I had missed my last chance to come clean. This proved 
my undoing." 
A fortnight later, in another letter dated 11 April, Nair wrote: 
I could still remember a few other things besides, including some 
of my aberrant conduct in Singapore during the fortnight before I 
222 From Third World to First 
left for Kuching. What frightens me, however, is that I simply 
cannot recall most of the reports on how I had behaved in 
Kuching. And yet they must be true, because several witnesses 
have attested to my conduct and to the remarks I made. What 
confuses me further is that on at least two occasions, of which I 
have clear memories, the reports contradict them. I am not a liar, 
but then there were the witnesses. Some of them may be liars, as I 
tend to believe, but not all of them can be liars. In the old days 
they talked of one being possessed. Was I possessed ? Or was it a 
Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde situation ? 
Perhaps there has been some brain damage. Almost certainly 
my brain functions must have been impaired , but to what extent 
remains to be seen. And to what extent can what has been 
impaired be repaired or even restored? That too remains to be 
seen. 
I had two roles: My first, as prime minister, was to protect the dignity 
of the office of president and Singapore's reputation; my second, as a per­
sonal friend, made me want to save him. After several days in the hospital 
we sent him off to Changi Cottage to dry him out. He insisted on going 
to an ashram (retreat) in India, to meditate and cure himself the Hindu 
way. I did not think he would get better that way and urged him to go for 
treatment. After considerable persuasion by Raja, Eddie, and some other 
old friends including S. R. Nathan, another close friend from NTUC days 
(later our president), he agreed to go to the Caron Foundation in the 
United States. A month later the treatment appeared successful. 
Nair insisted that we give him a pension. There was no provision in 
the constitution for any pension for the president. The cabinet decided to 
offer a pension to Devan on compassionate grounds, but on condition that 
a panel of government doctors saw him from time to time. Eddie Barker 
settled it with Nair, and moved the resolution in Parliament. After it was 
passed Nair turned it down, denying that he had agreed to the condition. 
The government did not remove the condition and Nair became embit­
tered. 
One and a half years later, in a letter published in the Far Eastern 
Economic Review (F EER ) of 29 January 1987, he denied that he was ever an 
Conductor of an Orchestra 223 
alcoholic. The permanent secretary (health) sent Nair and the PEER a let­
ter dated 14 February 1987, signed by all seven doctors who had managed 
Devan Nair's case in March and April 1985, confirming their diagnosis of 
alcoholism. No doctor has contradicted these findings. 
In May 1988, Nair intervened in the case of Francis Seow, a former 
solicitor general who had admitted chat he had obtained from a U.S. Scace 
Department official an assurance of asylum if he needed it. Nair attacked 
me, saying chis was what I had done when I lobbied for international sup­
port while fighting the Malay extremists in Malaysia, meaning char I 
would have fled from Malaysia in case of trouble. When Nair refused co 
withdraw his allegations, I sued him and cabled a command paper in 
Parliament containing the documents relating co his alcoholism. 
After these documents were published, Nair left Singapore and has 
not returned. Eleven years lacer ( 1999), in Canada, in an interview, he said 
chat he had been wrongly diagnosed and chat I had got the doctors co slip 
him hallucinatory drugs co make him out co be an alcoholic. As Dr. 
Nagulendran had warned us, there were "personality changes." 
My mistake in Nair's appointment was co assume, without checking, 
chat all was well with him. After his collapse, I consulted one of his 
closest NTUC friends, Ho See Beng. See Beng, an MP, confirmed chat 
Nair had been drinking heavily before he was appointed president by 
Parliament. Asked why he had not warned me of chis risk, he replied chat 
Nair was never comatose. Had misplaced loyalty not prevented See Beng 
from warning me of chis risk we would all have been spared much pain 
and embarrassment. 
Bue all said and done, Devan Nair played a significant pare in the 
building of modern Singapore. He stood up co be counted when the com­
munises attacked the PAP in the 1960s, and he initiated the moderniza­
tion of the labor movement chat made the NTUC an important partner in 
the development of our economy. 
PART 11 
In Search of Space­
Regional and International 
16. Ups and Downs with Malaysia 
On 20 March 1966, eight months after separation, Tunku Abdul Rahman, 
the prime minister of Malaysia, visited Singapore. I called on him at 
Federation House near the Botanic Gardens. For three hours we talked, 
had a Chinese dinner, watched television, and continued talking. The only 
other persons present that night were his wife and the Malaysian high 
commissioner, Jamal Abdul Latiff. It was the way the Tunku usually con­
ducted business. He talked of many things besides the matters most on his 
mind. 
The Tunku proposed that Singapore ministers join his ministers for 
golf in Cameron Highlands in April when he would be on leave after the 
installation of the Agong (the king). We would then get to know each 
other better and all the difficulties could be sorted out. He wanted to go 
back to the old easy, relaxed relationship to reduce tension between his 
non-Malays and Malays. I said that April would not be convenient; I had 
to go to London and Stockholm. Perhaps in June. Over dinner he made a 
veiled threat by reminding me casually that Singapore's lifeline was with 
Malaysia, that Singapore had to work closely with it. He asked why 
we had stopped their unemployed from seeking jobs in Singapore. I 
explained that we could not have free migration to Singapore for jobs. 
He could not understand how this strained our economy ; the same thing 
was happening in Kuala Lumpur. He had asked the Federal Industrial 
Development Agency to set up pioneer industries in Kuala Lumpur, Ipoh, 
Penang, and Johar Bahru. These things were bound to happen because 
228 From Third World to First 
Singapore was a big city! I patiently explained that unemployed Malay­
sians were not Singapore's responsibil ity, that we had our own unem­
ployed for whom we had to find jobs. 
He complained about Chin Chye and Raja making speeches criticiz­
ing Malaysia. I explained that those of my ministers who came from 
Malaya still reacted as Malayans, emotiona lly unable to detach themselves 
from the land of their birth and upbringing. They needed time to be rec­
onciled to being Singaporeans in a separate and independent country. 
Showing annoyance and impatience, he said sharply, "They must do so 
very quickly because I will not stand for this. These people have got other 
ideas and motives. In Raja's case, his loyalty may even be to India." The 
Tunku was wrong. Raja had been totally loyal to Malaysia although he 
was born in Jaffna, Ceylon. 
Before I took my leave at the front door, I said that we had to reach a 
new working relationship and cooperate for mutual benefit, hinting ever 
so gently that we could not go back to the happy old days when we were 
the supplicants seeking merger. 
I had mixed feelings about this first encounter with the Tunku after 
separation. He still expected me to oblige him. But I was reassured that 
he appeared to be still in charge. I knew he wanted a quiet life, and did 
not like prolonged tensions or crises. 
Malaysia's leaders continued to treat us as though we were still in the 
early 1960s, seeking merger. For their convenience, we were out of their 
Parliament and their politics. Now, although Singapore was independent 
and sovereign, the Tunku believed that his one battalion in Singapore and 
his ability to cut off our water supply or close the Causeway to stop all 
trade and travel would compel us to comply. If he could do this just with 
his old-world aristocratic charm, so much the better. 
In 1966, I was away for two months starting in April. Throughout 
this time, the Tunku, Razak, and Ghazali sniped at Toh Chin Chye, then 
our deputy prime minister, and me because we appeared ready to restore 
ties with Indonesia before Malaysia did so. The Tunku threatened reprisals. 
Chin Chye, as acting prime minister, had welcomed Indonesia's decision 
to recognize Singapore . Greatly upset, the Malaysian government issued 
this statement: 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 
Singapore's decision to welcome Indonesia 's decision to recognise 
her clearly means that Singapore would have some sort of relation 
or intercourse with Indonesia and this would bring Indonesian 
nationals to Singapore. Clearly when this happens, it will endan­
ger our security as Indonesia has repeatedly scared and is continu­
ing to do so char she intends to intensify confrontation against 
Malaysia. Malaysia must therefore continue to take whatever 
measure she considers necessary to safeguard her interests and her 
security. 229 
Immediately after that, on 18 April, Dr. Ismail, the Malaysian minis­
ter for home affairs, imposed with immediate effect entry controls for 
Singapore identity card holders crossing the Causeway. 
When I mer the Tunku after I returned from my visit to Britain and 
Eastern Europe, he grumbled co me about my journeys to these commu­
nist countries, that they would open embassies in Singapore and pose a 
threat to Malaysia. How could I have said I wanted to be good friends with 
China and Indonesia, he asked. I said that although my style was different 
from his, I did not intend to be eaten up by the communists. I recounted 
how we had refused permission for the crew of a Chinese ship docked in 
Singapore to land because the captain refused to sign an undertaking that 
they would not distribute their cultural revolution propaganda material. 
Radio Peking had attacked our immigration department. I explained that 
East European countries, excepting Romania, were caking the Soviet line 
which was opposed to China's. Their neutrality or support would prevent 
us from becoming isolated, which could happen because Singapore was 
hosting British bases, anathema to the nonaligned countries. 
Meanwhile , UMNO leaders continued to use the Utusan Mela yu, the 
Jawi (Arabic script) newspaper circulating in both countries, to work up 
Malay sentiment against the "Chinese" government of Singapore. The 
Utusan Mela yu reported that Ahmad Haji Taff, an UMNO leader in 
Singapore, one of Singapore's two former senators to the federal senate, 
had demanded that our constitutional commission write into the Singa­
pore constitution special rights for the Malays. These special rights were 
in the Malaysian constitution but had never applied to Singapore. 
230 From Third World to First 
Our news division translated the Utusan's inflammatory, racist state­
ments into English, Chinese, and Tamil, and reported them over radio 
and television and in the press. This hurt UMNO leaders with non­
Malays both in Singapore and Malaysia. Ismail and Ghazali complained 
about this. It was subverting Malaysia, said Ismail, and there could be no 
economic cooperation until there was political disengagement. We should 
not interfere in their internal affairs as we were a separate sovereign and 
independent nation. Ghazali went a step further, claiming that Malaysia 
had a special relationship with Singapore. He was disappointed they were 
not informed of our trade agreements with Russia and other communist 
countries. (Malaysia did not have any such agreements with communist 
countries.) He thought these came within the ambit of our agreement 
with Malaysia for economic cooperation and defense, that neither side 
would take any steps or enter into any treaty or agreements that would 
jeopardize the other's defense. I pointed out that he could not expect these 
courtesies without reciprocating them. 
Ghazali also wanted us to wait until they had restored relations with 
Indonesia before we resumed barter trade with them. He insisted that we 
allow only big ships of over 200 tons into our main harbor and turn away 
all smaller vessels, especially sailing boats, on security grounds. Our 
Special Branch, now renamed Internal Security Department (ISD), had 
reported that the Malaysians themselves were openly doing barter trade 
on the west coast of Malaya, allowing small sailing craft from Sumatra to 
come into Johar and Malacca ports. To discuss the matter, Keng Swee 
asked for a meeting of the Combined Defence Council which had been set 
up after our independence. They fixed a date, but to his surprise the meet­
ing was called off, because, the Malaysians claimed, we had accepted their 
proposal. We went ahead and designated Pulau Senang, an island at the 
southernmost point of Singapore, as a center for Indonesian barter traders 
who came in their sailing ships from as far away as Sulawesi (Celebes). 
Razak objected strenuously . Their unilateral decision making and over­
bearing demands made us resign from the Combined Defence Council. 
An endless flotilla of small craft, some with outboard motors, others 
with sails, brought in their crude rubber, copra, charcoal, and other pro­
duce. They departed with transistor radios, shirts, trousers, slippers, shoes, 
jackets, and hats. Some even bought whole boxes of bread to take back. In 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 231 
August 1966, after Confrontation had officially ended in June, we can­
celled all restrictions on barter trade. Indonesian small craft once again 
came to Telok Ayer Basin, one of Singapore's oldest harbors. 
The pressures following separation were relentless. There was never a dull 
moment in our relations with Malaysia. Despite our best efforts we could 
not reach an agreement on retaining our common currency, and the two 
governments announced in August 1966 that from June 1967 we would 
issue separate currencies. So would Brunei, which had shared the common 
currency, a legacy of British rule. The Singapore International Chamber of 
Commerce, representing British companies, the Council of the Associa­
tion of Banks in Malaysia, and the Singapore Chinese Chamber of Com­
merce were all worried by the uncertainty of a split and appealed to the 
two governments to negotiate again to maintain a common currency. 
Tan Siew Sin, the Malaysian finance minister, said the split would not 
mean the end of the world. He argued that the concessions he had made 
to accommodate Singapore involved a significant derogation of sover­
eignty on the part of Bank Negara Malaysia and ultimately the Malaysian 
government itself. Singapore, he said, was afraid Malaysia might not 
honor its undertaking to transfer the whole of Singapore's assets and lia­
bilities as shown in the books of the central bank, but this was merely a 
technical, not a fundamental, reason for the break. He implied that we 
lacked trust in their integrity. Indeed, Singapore's reserves could not be 
protected simply by relying on trust. 
We decided against setting up a central bank and continued with a cur­
rency board with 100 percent backing in foreign exchange reserves for every 
dollar we issued. Lim Kim San, as finance minister, expressed confidence in 
the strength and stability of Singapore's currency, which called for the 
tightest economic and social discipline. In Parliament, Kim San explained 
that "a central bank is an easy way out for a finance minister who likes to 
juggle [his figures} when he has a deficit in his budget. I do not think we 
should put such a temptation before the finance minister in Singapore." Tan 
Siew Sin responded, "If the central bank system is an inferior system, then it 
is clear that it is a mistake made by every industrialised country of the 
Western world and by every developing country .... Every independent 
232 From Third World to First 
country in the world has a central bank, or is in the process of establishing a 
central bank." Later, in Parliament, Tan said that the currency split was for 
the best, because unlike the old days, a nation's central bank was a powerful 
weapon for a finance minister in his monetary and fiscal policies. 
Both finance ministers announced that they would keep their curren­
cies pegged at two shillings and four pence to the dollar, or 0.290299 
grams of gold. They agreed on the "interchangeability " of the two curren­
cies: accepting each other's currency as customary tender and repatriating 
the currency in exchange for an equivalent amount in a convertible cur­
rency. Our two currencies continued with interchangeability from 1967 
until May 1973, when it was terminated at Malaysia's request. In January 
1975, the Malaysian dollar, the ringgic, dropped marginally co S$0.9998. 
By 1980, it had depreciated sharply by five cents against the Singapore 
dollar, and by 1997 it was worth less than 50 Singapore cents. Malaysian 
finance ministers and central bankers had run looser fiscal and monetary 
policies than Singapore. Noc spending more than we collect in revenue 
has been a guiding principle from which no Singapore finance minister 
has departed except in a recession. 
After Singapore left Malaysia in 1965, the UMNO-controlled federal 
government pressed ahead with Malay as the sole national and official lan­
guage, and changed its education policies co bring chis about. Non-Malay 
resentment against these changes had been increasing, and the strident 
communal tones of UMNO leaders did not help co assuage such feelings. 
In 1968, a Malaysian government white paper scared chat communise 
subversion was being carried out in independent Chinese secondary 
schools. This added co the fears chat they would be closed. 
During their election campaign in April-May 1969, Alliance leaders 
made wild and groundless allegations chat Singapore leaders had inter­
fered in their policies. Tan Siew Sin, who was also the Malaysian Chinese 
Association (MCA) president, said he had "definite evidence" chat the 
Democratic Action Party (DAP), formerly the PAP in Malaysia, was 
being financed by the PAP, if not the Singapore government. Raja, our 
foreign minister, registered Singapore 's concern with the Malaysian high 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 233 
commissioner, who agreed that these remarks were counterproductive. 
But two days later he reported that the Tunku supported Tan's charges, 
claiming that, on the evidence available, they were true. The Tunku him­
self then pitched in at an election rally to say that Singapore's PAP leaders 
were hoping to win over the government in Malaysia, and "knowing that 
they have no chance of winning the Chinese votes, they have no alterna­
tive but to split the Malays. So they are using the Pan Malaysian Islamic 
Party (PMIP) as their agent." He said that the man who had provided the 
PMIP with funds had now been forbidden to reenter Malaysia, but 
refused to disclose his identity. 
I was away in London when these wild allegations were made. I wrote 
to Lim Kim San, our defense minister: "I am a little bewildered by the 
crazy allegations of the Tunku and Siew Sin about our supposed interfer­
ence in their elections. I also wonder when all this will explode into racial 
strife and guerrilla warfare. We had better build up as fast as we can. I am 
sure the troubles will spill over to Singapore. By the time thousands of 
people are prepared to openly demonstrate against them in KL, and 
march through the streets in a funeral procession, then the future is grim 
indeed." I was referring to the funeral of a Chinese youth shot and killed 
by police a few days earlier while he was in a group painting antigovern­
ment election slogans. 
On polling day in Malaysia, 10 May, UMNO lost 8 out of the 59 seats 
they held. The DAP won 14 seats in urban constituencies including 
Kuala Lumpur, defeating the MCA, UMNO's partner, in 13 of them. The 
DAP and Gerakan (another noncommunal party) held a parade in Kuala 
Lumpur to celebrate their victory-they had won half the seats in the 
Selangor state assembly. The UMNO Malay Ultras' response to this was 
to have a bigger parade organized by the Selangor menteri besar (chief min­
ister), Harun Idris. A race riot followed on 13 May. The casualty pattern 
in Kuala Lumpur was similar to that in Singapore for the 1964 race riots 
when Singapore was under Kuala Lumpur's control. Both Kuala Lumpur 
and Singapore were at that time predominantly Chinese-populated cities 
with a minority of Malays. Yet many more Chinese were killed by this 
Malay minority than Malays who were killed in retaliation. The official 
Kuala Lumpur casualty figures were: killed 143 Chinese, 25 Malays, 13 
234 From Third World to First 
Indians, 15 others; wounded 439. This could not have been the case if the 
police and military were impartial. One foreign correspondent who wit­
nessed the riots estimated the number killed at 800. 
The next day the Malaysian king proclaimed a state of emergency and 
suspended Parliament. The government created a National Operations 
Council (NOC) with Razak as chairman to govern by decree to restore law 
and order. Officially the Tunku was no longer in charge. This NOC 
marked the end of the Tunku era, and these riots changed the nature of 
Malaysian society. From then on Malaysia became openly a Malay­
dominated society. 
The riots in Kuala Lumpur had caused widespread alarm among both 
Chinese and Malays in Singapore, as both felt that the racial troubles 
would inevitably spill into Singapore. Malaysian Chinese who had fled to 
Singapore recounted stories of brutalities inflicted on their relatives there. 
As news spread of Malaysian Malay atrocities and of the bias of the 
Malaysian armed forces in dealing with the situation, there was anger and 
alarm. I was away in America, speaking to students in Yale, when I read 
news of these riots. Within days of the Kuala Lumpur riots, there were 
attacks on Malays by Chinese in Singapore. This senseless retaliation 
against innocent Malays was stopped by strong police action, troop 
deployment, and the prosecution of several attackers caught in the act. 
They were subsequently charged and convicted. 
Four months after the riots, I called on the Tunku at his high com­
missioner 's residence in Singapore. He looked depressed, showing the 
effects of a harrowing experience. He had been openly attacked in a 
widely circulated letter by Dr. Mahathir Mohamad (later the prime min­
ister, then a member of UMNO's central executive council) for having 
sold out the country to the Chinese. I sensed he wanted Singapore to be 
friendly and to influence the Chinese in Malaysia not to be hostile to the 
UMNO leaders. I wrote this note to my colleagues : "What worries me is 
not whether our supporting the Tunku would lose us our non-Malay 
ground, but whether it would not in fact lose the Tunku his Malay 
ground, and so hasten his retirement." 
Kim San met Razak in Kuala Lumpur a week later and reported that 
this time there was "no trace of the former big brother attitude. They are 
willing to receive advice if tactfully given without a show of upman-
Ups and Down with Malaysia 235 
ship .... It would be worth our while to prop them up for a little longer 
in what way we can." We were fearful that the Tunku and all his moder­
ates would be displaced by real Ultras. Malaysia's international standing 
dropped precipitously, and Razak was defensive. Ironically, relations 
between Singapore and Malaysia improved. He needed us to help keep the 
Chinese in Malaysia reassured and quiescent. Our influence from Malaysia 
days still prevailed. 
After separation, the practice of having one newspaper put out by the 
same editorial staff selling in both Singapore and Malaysia had continued. 
But after the May 1969 race riots in Kuala Lumpur, the Utusan Melayu 
became even more pro-Malay and openly hostile toward the Singapore 
government, belittling our efforts to help Singapore Malays. To stop it 
from propagating racist sentiments in Singapore, we changed the regula­
tions to require that all newspapers must be both produced and have their 
editorial boards in Singapore before they could qualify for a license to 
print and sell here. The Utusan Me/ayu closed its Singapore office and 
stopped circulating. Soon thereafter, newspapers published in one terri­
tory could not be imported and sold in the other. It has remained so to 
this day. Both governments recognized that there were such fundamental 
differences of policy on race, language, and culture that what was ortho­
doxy in Singapore was sedition in Malaysia and vice versa. 
By Malaysia's National Day, 31 August 1970, the Tunku was suffi­
ciently weakened to announce his intention to give up his prime minis­
tership. I felt sad for him. It was not the way to bow out after 15 years, 
first as chief minister, then prime minister, during which he had done 
much to bring Malaysia's different races together and had presided over 
much economic and social progress. He deserved to go out with more 
glory. The 1969 race riots had destroyed his dream of the happy Malaysia 
he had tried so hard to achieve. I was personally fond of him. He was a 
gentleman-an old-world gentleman with his own code of honor. He 
never let his close friends down. Although he did not include me among 
them, I continued to meet him whenever he came to Singapore for the 
horse races or when I visited Penang where he had retired. The last time 
was in Penang a year before he died in 1990. He looked frail, but when I 
took my leave, he saw me to the front porch and held himself up to have 
the press photograph us as he sent me off. 
236 From Third World to First 
Razak, who took over as prime minister in September 1970, was 
a different leader from the Tunku. He did not have the Tunku's warm 
personality or his large and commanding presence. By comparison he 
appeared less decisive. Razak had been my contemporary at Raffles 
College from 1940 to 1942. He was the son of a Pahang chieftain. In their 
hierarchical society, he was much respected by the Malay students. Of 
medium build, with a fair, round face and hair slicked down, he looked a 
quiet, studious man. He was bright and hardworking. He was also a good 
hockey player, but ill at ease with people unless he knew them well. 
During Malaysia, when we were competing for the same votes, he eyed 
me with suspicion and unease. He probably considered me a danger to 
Malay dominance and political supremacy. He preferred to deal with 
Keng Swee with whom he was comfortable. Razak did not consider Keng 
Swee a rival competing for votes. Once Singapore was out of Malaysia, 
Razak was more at ease with me. I was no longer a competitor for votes. 
He and other UMNO Malay leaders rejected the Tunku's approach to 
Chinese businessmen as out-of-date. Having experienced total power, 
both political and military, they were now completely open about their 
economic policies that favored the bumiputra (sons of the soil-indige­
nous Malays) in every sector. They implemented the New Economic 
Policy "to eradicate poverty" and to have "greater equality in the owner­
ship of wealth." Malays were by regulation and administration to own 30 
percent of all private capital by the year 1990, the Chinese and Indian 
population were to own 40 percent, and the foreign owners (mostly 
British) were to be reduced to 30 percent. Razak also announced a 
national ideology, the Rukunegara, that people of all races should advance 
together toward a just and progressive society through belief in God, loy­
alty to king and country, upholding the constitution and the rule of law, 
and the promotion of moral discipline, tolerance, and mutual respect. It 
was August 1970, more than a year after the race riots, before they lifted 
all remaining curfews and allowed political activities to resume. But sedi­
tion had assumed an extended meaning to include any challenge to the 
Rukunegara and Malay dominance. 
Razak was preoccupied with getting the country back to normal after 
the trauma of the riots, and with fleshing out his New Economic Policy, 
so we had a relatively trouble-free few years. However, from time to time 
1971: Puttin g our black labrador retriever, Bonnie-a gift from Alec Dou glas 
Home-thr ough her paces while Hsien Yang, Choo , an<l Ling look on. (SM Lee'.r 
Collection) 
April 1955: My first election victory in the Tanjong Pagar conscicuency, which I 
continue co represent 45 years lacer in 2000. (Copyright SPH) 
November 1959: 
Picking up che 
broom and leading 
one of many cam­
paigns to keep 
Singapore clean and 
green. (Copyright 
SPH) 
In 1964, I toured trouble spots in Tanjong Pagar and other constituencies to 
calm down residents terrified by racial clashes. (Copyright SPH) 
April 1965: A French-style 
greeting by Prince Norodom 
Sihanouk in his palace in 
Phnom Penh. (SM Lee'.r 
Collection) 
July 1965: Reading the riot ace co K. Suppiah, president of the Public Daily 
Raced Employees' Unions Federation, co warn him against making excessive 
demands before an illegal strike. (Copyright SPH) 
ABOVE: 1965: Visiting 
Bukic Ho Swee residents 
reseeded in high-rise 
apartments four years after 
a huge fire razed their 
squatter colony. (Copyright 
SPH) 
LEFT: January 1968: 
Opening the new golf 
course on HMS Simhang in 
Singapore. Royal Navy 
officers invited me co open 
i r just before I left for 
London co see Harold 
Wilson. (SM Lee'.r 
Collection) 
1969: A visit to the White House with President Richard Nixon and National 
Security Adviser Henry Kissinger; also in attendance was the Singapore ambas­
sador E. S. Monteiro. (SM Lee's Collec tion) 
May 197 3: My first official visit to Suharto's Indonesia-scattering flowers on 
graves of two Indonesian marines executed in Singapore in 1968 for murders 
committed in 1965. (Copyright SPH) 
May 1976: Meeting Chairman Mao Tse Tung in Beijing's Zhongnanhai, an 
enclave for China's leaders. (SM Lee's Collection) 
November 1978: Choo and I welcoming Deng Xiaoping and his wife for dinner 
at the lstana. Standing behind Choo is deputy prime minister Goh Keng Swee. 
(SM Lee's Collection) 
August 1982: Meeting in the White House with friends President Ronald 
Reagan and the U.S. Secretary of Scace George Shultz. (SM Lee:, Cofleition) 
September 1982: 
President Suharto 
greeting me at the 
Jakarta Airport. 
(CupyriJ!.ht SPH) 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 237 
we had problems over both trivial and important matters. Singapore had 
an antilong hair campaign in 1971 as we did not want our young to adopt 
the hippie look. Men with long hair were attended to last at government 
counters and at all entry points-airport, port, and Causeway . Three 
youths, two Malays and a Chinese, were picked up at the Orchard Road 
parking lot and interrogated as suspected secret society members. They 
were detained for 16 hours, had their hair cut by a police barber, and 
released. They turned out to be Malaysians. The Utusan Melayu played up 
the story which caused a minor storm. The government apologized for the 
incident. In the meantime, substantial disputes were brewing over our 
port and the splitting of assets of our joint currency board and our joint 
airline. 
Soon after separation, Tan Siew Sin had reportedly threatened to 
bypass Singapore and develop Malaysia's Port Swettenham (later called 
Port Kelang) and Penang, describing the 40 percent of Malaysia's trade 
that went through Singapore as a "relic of the colonial past." Malaysia 
subsequently took a series of measures to reduce the import and export of 
goods through Singapore. The Johor Malay Chamber of Commerce in 
August 197 2 called on the federal government to abolish train services to 
Singapore as soon as Johor's port at Pasir Gudang, near Johor Bahru, was 
ready. Malaysia announced in October 1972 that from 1973 all goods 
shipped from one part of Malaysia to another had to be consigned from 
their own ports in order to qualify for exemption from import tax on 
arrival. If these goods came through the port of Singapore, they had to 
pay import tax. They also banned timber exports to Singapore, badly 
affecting our plywood factories and sawmills. After a period of disruption, 
we were able to source timber from Indonesia. 
As Hon Sui Sen, then our finance minister, the most patient and rea­
sonable of my colleagues, wrote to me, "The Malaysian attitude on eco­
nomic cooperation is one of envy and disdain. They believe that Singapore 
cannot survive without Malaysia and that our prosperity is completely 
dependent upon them. Nevertheless, they are irritated and annoyed by 
the fact that despite our size and vulnerability, we have progressed beyond 
their expectations. " 
We discovered in the late 1960s that the Malaysians had formed an "S" 
committee to coordinate Malaysian policies on problems with Singapore. 
238 From Third World to First 
Its chairman was the head of the Malaysian civil service and its members 
included the secretaries-general of the ministries of defense, foreign affairs, 
and home affairs. We also learned that they had coopted, from time to time, 
former PAP pro-communist ex-detainees including Sandra Woodhull and 
James Puthucheary to help them understand the thinking behind our 
policies. When we first heard of it, the "S" committee had sinister over­
tones. But we had little trouble reading their motives; they wanted to 
choke our economic growth wherever their economy gave them leverage 
over ours. Much later, when Malaysia was under Prime Minister Hussein 
Onn and our relations were more relaxed, I proposed an intergovernmental 
committee to resolve bilateral issues. Tengku Rithaudeen, his foreign min­
ister, told me on 13 May 1980, at a meeting in Sri Temasek, that they 
already had an "S" committee to study problems with Singapore. By 
October 1986, the "S" committee had widened its focus to include bilat­
eral relations with Indonesia, Thailand, and Brunei, and was renamed the 
Foreign Relations Committee (FRC). After that the Malaysians spoke 
openly to our officials about the FRC and its role in managing bilateral rela­
tions. The cloak-and-dagger approach of the "S" committee was abandoned. 
The only Malaysian minister who was not prejudiced against 
Singapore was Deputy Prime Minister Tun Dr. Ismail. When he visited 
Singapore in April 1971 on the excuse of inspecting our housing pro­
grams, we had a good talk. He wanted more cooperation. He told the 
press that differences of opinion should not obstruct greater cooperation 
between us. At his urging, our state trading agency, lntraco, signed an 
agreement in 1971 to cooperate with Pernas, its Malaysian counterpart, 
in third country trade. Not much trade came out of this: lsmail's lone 
voice could not prevail against the other UMNO leaders. 
To mark improving bilateral relations, I made my first official visit to 
Malaysia in March 1972, accompanied by Sui Sen. We discussed and set­
tled the disposition of the currency board's surplus funds and residual 
assets. We negotiated in a businesslike way. The difficulty with Razak, 
however, was that every now and then he would change his mind and 
reopen an item already agreed upon. 
Razak returned the visit in 1973. He wanted to terminate the inter­
changeability of our two currencies. I agreed. The Malaysia-Singapore 
Stock Exchange was also split in May 1973 into the Stock Exchange of 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 239 
Singapore and the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange. Each kept its prevail­
ing listing of Singapore and Malaysian stocks. Razak was happy with the 
current state of relations. Publicly, relations were not so close as to embar­
rass him with his Malay base, nor were they in such a state of acrimony as 
to upset his Chinese support. Razak said he anticipated troubles for both 
Singapore and Malaysia from the uncertainties in Thailand and Indochina, 
and so we should not add to our difficulties by creating problems between 
ourselves. I agreed. He was uneasy and concerned about his Chinese sup­
port in Malaysia and the lack of support for the MCA in the next election 
and asked if I could help. I had no reply. An increase in commodity prices 
had given him greater confidence and eased his sense of resentment at our 
doing better than them. 
Razak invited me for a return visit. Relations were equable and stayed 
that way for the next three years, with quiet cooperation and few serious 
disagreements. Then I learned that Razak had leukemia. He flew to 
London frequently for treatment. In newspaper photographs and on tele­
vision he appeared visibly thinner by the month. When he died in 
January 1976, I paid my respects at his home in Kuala Lumpur. 
Hussein Onn succeeded Razak as prime minister. He was a practicing 
lawyer in 1968 when Prime Minister Razak brought him into active poli­
tics. They were brothers-in-law, married to two sisters. 
Hussein did not look the typical Malay. He had a Turkish grand­
mother, spoke with a strong voice and was unusually fair for a Malay. He 
wore glasses, had curly hair and was taller and broader-bui lt than Razak. 
He was very careful in his work. At formal meetings, he would have his 
brief before him with important passages neatly underlined in color, and 
would go through his brief methodically. He did not believe in trusting 
only to his memory. He was open and direct when he dealt with me, com­
ing straight to the point, unlike Razak. I liked him. He was of the same 
age as Razak and me. His father, Dato Onn binJaafar, had been the menteri 
besar of Johar and the first leader of UMNO, which was formed shortly 
after the British returned in 1945 and promulgated the Malayan Union. 
Hussein set out to make a fresh start. A few weeks after Razak's 
funeral, he visited Singapore, saying he wanted to establish good personal 
240 From Third World to First 
relations and be able to discuss and overcome bilateral problems. We had 
a one-on-one meeting. I told him my fears of Malay communists and their 
sympathizers penetrating Malaysia's mass media and their radical Malay 
student and trade union leadership. We talked freely and frankly about 
the Malay communist infiltration of his media, including the activities of 
Samad Ismail, an MCP member from his time in Singapore in the 1950s, 
and his group. When Razak was prime minister, Samad had worked his 
way into UMNO and become a powerful figure in the New Straits Times 
and Berita Harian, building up a coterie of supporters. Hussein agreed 
this was a danger but said that the communists and student radicals could 
not be arrested without upsetting the Malay ground. Later, in June 1976, 
the ISD arrested one of Samad's disciples in Singapore, Hussein Jahidin, 
a Berita Harian editor. He implicated Samad and several other Malay 
journalists in Kuala Lumpur as pro-communists. The Malaysian Special 
Branch arrested Samad and his Kuala Lumpur group. Hussein Onn had 
had the courage to act against a pro-communist Malay intelligentsia 
although this was likely to cost him some support. 
Hussein had fond memories of Singapore. He had studied at Telok 
Kurau English School in 1933-1934, the years when I was also a student 
there. He was a little diffident at the beginning and was happy that I 
treated him with respect. I was impressed by his integrity and his good 
intentions. I took up his invitation to visit Malaysia in December 1976, 
when he briefed me on his internal security and Thai border problems. 
We also discussed economic cooperation. 
Our relations had started off on a good footing but unfortunately he 
was influenced by the anti-Singapore feelings of Johor UMNO leaders, 
especially the menteri besar, Othman Saat, the most important UMNO 
leader in Hussein's home state. Othman injected his visceral dislike for 
Singapore into Hussein, who repeated to me Othman's complaints: We 
had caused a shortage of workers in their factories by attracting their 
workers to work in Singapore for more pay; Johor Bahm shopkeepers lost 
business because of competition from Woodlands New Town on our side 
of the Causeway. (In the 1990s, when one Singapore dollar was worth 
more than two ringgit, they complained that Singaporeans flocked to 
their shops causing prices to rise for their locals.) 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 241 
The most absurd allegation of the menteri besar repeated by Hussein 
was that pig waste from our farms was polluting the straits betweenJohor 
and Singapore. And for good measure, that land reclamation on our 
northern coast had caused flooding in their southern coastal villages in 
the Tebrau area. I carefully explained that land reclamation on Singapore 's 
northern coastline could not cause flooding in Johor; hydrologically this 
was impossible. And the pig waste pollution could not have come from 
Singapore because all our runoffs were trapped in rivers that had been 
dammed to form estuarine reservoirs with strict antipollution measures 
for the water to be potable. He accepted my explanations. 
Despite amicable relations with Hussein, the Malaysians continued to 
take a series of actions that they thought would slow down our economy. 
First, the Johor state government banned the export of sand and turf. 
Then the federal government ruled that from 1977, all exports from J ohor 
to East Malaysia must be shipped through Pasir Gudang port, not 
through Singapore. From 1980, they limited the carriage of all domestic 
cargo between Malaysian ports to their own vessels. They carried out 
these policies although their people had to pay the increased costs. Johor 
leaders convinced Hussein that we were out to harm Johor and prevent its 
economic progress. They even persuaded Hussein to tell the press in 
January 1979 that he was considering stopping the railway in Johor and 
not Singapore, in order to develop Pasir Gudang as a port. 
One incident which added to this bitterness occurred in December 
1976 after our general election. ISO officers found that Leong Mun Kwai, 
the secretary-general of the People's Front and an opposition candidate, 
had made defamatory remarks against me in the election that month 
because he had been paid to do so by the Malaysian Special Branch. We 
put him on television to admit this. He was convicted for criminal 
defamation and sentenced to 18 months in prison. Leong told the ISO 
that UMNO leader Senu Abdul Rahman, the former Malaysian minister 
of culture, youth, and sports, had personally told Leong to try to destroy 
my reputation. 
On economic cooperation, I said we were moving away from simple 
manufacture into higher value-added products with more machines . We 
were also moving more into services-repairing of aircraft, working with 
242 From Third World to First 
computers, and so on. We would be happy if our factories, short of labor 
in Singapore, relocated to Johor. Nor did we want to block the growth of 
their port in Pasir Gudang. 
Although he was influenced by his Johor UMNO leaders to be suspi­
cious of Singapore, I found Hussein fair-minded. He wanted to do right 
by his country and by those who dealt with him. He was not as quick as 
Razak but was thorough, careful, and did not have second thoughts after a 
decision. He weighed his words carefully. 
In 1981, Hussein flew to London for a medical checkup. He was diag­
nosed as having heart trouble and resigned soon after. He went back to 
law and died in 1990. He had won my respect as a man of integrity. 
Sitting at the top of an UMNO machine that was based on money poli­
tics, Hussein was completely honest. He tried to clean up the corruption, 
especially in the states. He authorized the prosecution in November 1975 
against the menteri besar of Selangor, Datuk Harun Idris. Harun was con­
victed and imprisoned for four years. But Hussein could not widen his 
purge in the face of resistance from other UMNO state leaders. 
In Parliament in Kuala Lumpur in May 1965, Dr. Mahathir Mohamad, as 
MP for Kota Star Selatan in Kedah, warned me of the consequences of 
challenging Malay rule. He denounced the PAP as 
pro-Chinese, communist-oriented and positively anti-Malay .... 
In some police stations, Chinese is the official language, and 
statements are taken in Chinese .... In industry, the PAP policy 
is to encourage Malays to become labourers only, but Malays were 
not given facilities to invest as well. ... It is, of course, necessary 
to emphasise that there are two types of Chinese-those who 
appreciate the need for all communities to be equally well-off and 
these are the MCA supporters to be found mainly where Chinese 
have for generations lived and worked amidst the Malays and 
other indigenous people, and the insular, selfish and arrogant 
type, of which Mr. Lee is a good example. This latter type live in 
a purely Chinese environment where Malays only exist at syce 
level. ... They have never known Malay rule and could not bear 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 
the idea that the people that they have so long kept under their 
heels should now be in a position to rule them. 243 
Ac a time when UMNO was demanding my detention and burning 
my effigy, these words were ominous. My riposte was chat we had agreed 
to the constitution of Malaysia which provided for Malaysian, not Malay, 
rule. This was no light-hearted exchange in the ordinary cuc-and-chrusc of 
debate. He meant chat I did not know my proper place in Malaysia. 
In his autobiography, serialized by the Nihon Keizai Shimbun in 
1995, he said that his "father's blood line has supposedly been traced back 
co Kerala State in India." His mother was a Malay born in Kedah. Bue he 
identified himself totally as a Malay and was determined in wanting co 
uplift the Malays. 
When Hussein Onn appointed him as his deputy prime minister and 
minister for education I decided co hold out my hand in friendly coopera­
tion for the future, regardless of our profound differences in the past. 
Through Devan Nair, who knew him well from his years in the Malaysian 
Parliament, I invited Mahachir to Singapore in 1978. I expected Mahachir 
to succeed Hussein as prime minister and wanted co put our old antago­
nism behind us. I knew he was a fierce and dogged fighter. I had seen the 
way he had fought the Tunku when the Tunku was at the height of his 
power. He had been expelled from UMNO but that did not deter him 
from carrying on the fight. I was nor unwilling co clash with him when 
we were in Malaysia, hue feuding between two sovereign scares was differ­
ent. I initiated chis dialogue to clear away the debris of the past. 
He accepted the invitation and followed up with several subsequent 
visits. We had long and frank exchanges of several hours each co clear the 
air surrounding our suspicions of each ocher. 
He was direct and asked what we were building the SAF (Singapore 
Armed Forces) for. I replied equally directly chat we feared chat at some 
time or ocher there could be a random act of madness like cutting off our 
water supplies, which they had publicly threatened whenever there were 
differences between us. We had nor wanted separation. le had been thrust 
upon us. The Separation Agreement with Malaysia was a pare of the terms 
on which we left and had been deposited in the United Nations. In chis 
agreement, the Malaysian government had guaranteed our water supply. 
244 From Third World to First 
If this was breached, we would go to the UN Security Council. If water 
shortage became urgent, in an emergency, we would have to go in, 
forcibly if need be, to repair damaged pipes and machinery and restore the 
water flow. I was putting my cards on the table. He denied that any such 
precipitate action would happen. I said I believed that he would not do 
this, but we had to be prepared for all contingencies. 
Mahathir was candid about his deep anti-Singapore feelings. He 
recounted how, as a medical student in Singapore, he had directed a 
Chinese taxi driver to the home of a lady friend, but had been taken to the 
servants' quarters of this house. It was an insult he did not forget. Singa­
pore Chinese, he said, looked down upon the Malays. 
He wanted me to cut off my links with Malaysia's Chinese leaders, in 
particular the DAP leaders. He undertook not to interfere with Singa­
pore's Malays. I said we would live and let live, that I had not kept up 
contact with the DAP. He said clearly that he accepted an independent 
Singapore and had no intention of undermining it. My reply was that on 
this basis we could build a relationship of trust and confidence. So long as 
we believed they wanted to do us in, we would always be distrustful, 
reading sinister motives into every ambiguous move. 
He was different from his predecessors. The Tunku, Razak, and 
Hussein Onn were from the aristocracy or the traditional ruling families 
associated with the sultans. Like me, Mahathir is a commoner-a trained 
professional doctor and a self-made politician. I believed I had satisfied 
him that I was not interested in outmaneuvring him, that I wanted a 
businesslike relationship. It was as well I initiated this dialogue and 
developed a working relationship. Had we carried our old antagonisms 
into the future, both countries would have suffered. 
As prime minister, he visited Singapore in December 1981. He had 
advanced the time for peninsular Malaysia by half an hour so as to have 
one time zone for West and East Malaysia. I said Singapore would do like­
wise for the convenience of everyone. This put him in a good mood. He 
explained that he had had to educate his Malaysian officials to get them to 
reverse their opposition to Singapore Airlines flying to Penang. Subse­
quently, hotels in Penang were full and both airlines had profitable loads, 
benefiting from cooperation. He had asked his ministers and officers to 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 245 
learn from Singapore. No other Malaysian prime minister or minister had 
ever publicly said they had anything to learn from Singapore; Mahathir 
did not suffer from this inhibition. This open-minded attitude of learning 
from anyone whose success he wanted co duplicate in Malaysia distin­
guished him from his predecessors. 
During our one-on-one meeting, he said people in Johar were jealous 
of Singapore. He advised me to lessen the envy by socializing at an official 
level. I said his foreign ministry, Wisma Putra, had objected co such frat­
ernizing. He said he would tell them this was his proposal. This was a sig­
nificant change of policy. In a matter-of-fact way, Mahathir said that there 
was resentment among Malaysia's Malays against Singapore as a prosper­
ous Chinese city, just as they resented the Chinese in the Malaysian towns. 
But the people at the top in Kuala Lumpur understood this problem. 
I expressed my hope to establish sound and steady relations so that 
our problems would not be blown out of proportion. He wanted an open 
and frank relationship, one that would be fair and equitable. He had 
ordered the lifting of the ban on the export of construction materials to 
Singapore. It was not being announced, but he had cold the Johar author­
ities that this was a federal matter in which they could not interfere. 
We then joined our officials and ministers. On Malaysia's claim to 
Pedra Branca, a small rocky island Singapore had owned for more than 
100 years and where it had built a lighthouse, he said both parties should 
sit down and sort it out. We could exchange papers and settle the issue. I 
agreed. On the Straits of Johar, he wanted the Thalweg line (the line 
along the deepest channel between the two shores) to be fixed and not to 
shift with the shifting of the channel. I agreed. I requested the return of a 
military camp they were occupying and the acquisition of a portion of 
Malayan Railway land at Tanjong Pagar Station for an expressway exten­
sion. He agreed. After dinner, he said with satisfaction, "Nearly all bilat­
eral issues have been resolved." I replied, "Let's keep it like that." It was a 
good first meeting. We had established a relationship. 
Shortly after, our high commission in Kuala Lumpur reported a per­
ceptible improvement in attitudes among Malaysian ministers, MPs, and 
civil servants toward Singapore. They were willing to learn from Singa­
pore and were open about it. They praised Changi Airport and hoped that 
246 From Third World to First 
Subang would be half as good. There were increased visits to Singapore to 
study our productivity, urban planning, and other matters. 
I visited Mahathir in Kuala Lumpur the following year, in 1982. In a 
two-hour one-on-one meeting, we moved from just solving bilateral prob­
lems to negotiating new areas of cooperation. On the Five-Power Defence 
Agreement (FPDA) and the Integrated Air Defence System, Mahathir 
said they would counterbalance the Soviet bases in Vietnam. I told him 
we were buying four American E2C Hawkeye surveillance aircraft to give 
advance warning of any aerial attack on Singapore. Together we briefed 
our ministers and officials on items we had agreed upon, including 
Malaysia's affirmation char they would honor the 1962 Water Agreement 
co provide 250 million gallons per day co Singapore. 
The meeting was decidedly warmer than the last. Mahathir's approach 
to Singapore was more pragmatic. At a press conference, I said there had 
been a meeting of minds, that we were on the same wavelength. Improved 
relations spread to warmer personal relations between officers of our armed 
forces where previously there had been almost no interaction. 
The thaw did not last long. Antipathy for and envy of Singapore always 
tempted Malay leaders to seek popularity with their Malay grass roots by 
hitting our ac Singapore. Worse, the Malaysian government resumed cak­
ing actions that hurt Singapore. In January 1984, they imposed a RMlO0 
levy on all goods vehicles leaving Malaysia for Singapore. 
I asked Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Musa Hitam in Singapore 
two months later why they took action that would discourage the reloca­
tion of industries from Singapore to Malaysia by Japanese and American 
MNCs. These MNCs had set up electronic assembly plants in Johar to 
have the products sent to Singapore for more complex operations. The 
RMl00 levy was a signal that such a relocation was not favored. Musa 
replied it was part of a learning process. He believed someone had sug­
gested this as an easy way to get revenue but they would discover the 
wider implications. But Musa had no influence over Mahathir' s policy. 
Instead of cancelling the levy they increased it to RM200 to discourage 
the use of Singapore's port. 
In October that year, Malaysia reduced its import duty on a variety of 
foodstuffs, mostly from China, provided they were imported direct from 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 247 
the country of origin into Malaysia. We told their finance minister, Daim 
Zainuddin, that this violated GATT rules, and that we would have to 
report it. He amended their policy to exempt duty on goods imported via 
sea and airports but not via a land route, like the Causeway. It was clear 
that the measure was aimed against Singapore. 
In 1986, our ministry of foreign affairs announced that Israeli President 
Chaim Herzog was to make a state visit that November on the invitation of 
our president. There was an outcry in Malaysia, with demonstr ation rallies 
and protests outside our high commission in Kuala Lumpur, in their states, 
and at the Causeway . They protested officially. Daim, who was close to 
Mahathir, told our high commissioner that the visit was an insult to 
Malaysia and the Muslims. He said that although Mahathir had said in 
Parliament that they would not interfere in another country's affairs, pri­
vately he was very unhappy. I told our high commissioner to explain that 
we had announced the visit and could not cancel it without damage to 
ourselves. Mahathir recalled the Malaysian high commissioner in Singa­
pore for the duration of President Herzog's visit, saying that relations 
with Singapore were no longer as good, but that ties were far from tense. 
From time to time, whenever the Malaysians wanted things their way, 
even on matters strictly within our domestic rights, relations with 
Malaysia were strained. What they wanted is called in the Malay language 
an abang-adik (big brother-l ittle brother) relationship, with little brother 
giving way graciously . When nonvital interests were at stake, we were 
prepared to humor abang, but not when adik had legitimate interests to 
defend, as in the next issue that arose-Malays in the SAF in Singapore. 
In February 1987, my son Loong, then minister for trade and indus­
try and second minister for defense, answered a question on Malays in the 
SAF at a constituency function. Our Malays were asking MPs why we did 
not have Malay national servicemen in sensitive key positions in the SAF 
like the air force or armored units. The cabinet had decided to take the 
matter into the open. Loong said that in the event of a conflict, the SAF 
did not want any of its soldiers to be put in a difficult position where his 
loyalty to the nation might conflict with his emotions and his religion. 
We did not want any soldier to feel he was not fighting for a just cause, or 
worse, that his side might not be in the right. In time, as our national 
248 From Third World to First 
identity became more developed, this would be less of a problem. The 
Malaysian media read this as implying that Malaysia was the enemy. An 
unending stream of critical articles ensued. 
The Malaysian foreign minister, Rais Yatim, raised this speech with 
our foreign minister. Malaysia, he said, was a "glasshouse" in the matter, 
because its own Chinese were represented only to a small extent in the 
armed forces and in the top echelons of the civil service. This, he added, 
was clearly understood and accepted by the MCA, that Malaysian policies 
were based on Malay dominance. Therefore, Malaysia could not be critical 
of Singapore on this issue. However, airing these problems publicly cre­
ated internal pressures on UMNO leaders to respond, because it was 
difficult for Malay Malaysians not to associate themselves with Malay 
Singaporeans. But we had never criticized their policy of having Malay­
dominant armed forces. 
Later, in October 1987, I met Mahathir at the Commonwealth Heads 
of Government Meeting in Vancouver. He said that all the things he had 
wanted to do in cooperation with me had gone wrong. They started to 
go wrong with the Herzog visit, then came the issue of Malays in the SAE 
In April 1987, two assault boats with four SAF personnel entered a 
small creek, Sungei Melayu, opposite Singapore-Malaysian territorial 
waters-by mistake for 20 minutes. Malaysia delivered a verbal protest. 
They were suspected of spying. I apologized for their mistake but pointed 
out that they could not have been spying as they were in uniform. 
Mahathir said he could not come to Singapore to see me because the 
atmosphere had gone sour. He suggested that we should have a few Malay 
pilots to show Malays in Malaysia that we trusted our Singapore Malays 
and that we did not consider Malaysia to be our enemy. He said all gov­
ernments had to fudge; Malaysia regularly denied discriminating against 
the Chinese in the Malaysian armed forces. Singapore should also deny 
publicly our policies on Malays in the SAE For good Singapore-Malaysia 
relations, he advised that we should conduct ourselves in a manner that 
would not make the Malays in Malaysia unhappy about Malays in 
Singapore. 
That meeting, however, helped to restore some personal rapport. He 
had also asked me to help in the development of Langkawi, an island off 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 249 
the coast of Kedah, as a tourist resort by getting Singapore Airlines to fly 
in passengers. SIA launched a three-day package in Japan and Australia, 
but without success. I told him Langkawi could not compete with Penang 
and the Thai island of Phuket nearby because it did not have the infra­
structure. He asked me to discuss the problems with Daim. 
Daim Zainuddin is his close aide and long-standing friend from his 
home state, Kedah. He has a quick mind, is good at figures and decisive, 
and had been successful in business before he became finance minister. 
As finance minister, Daim initiated the policies that moved Malaysia 
from state-owned enterprises into profit-oriented private enterprise cor­
porations. Without his active intervention , Malaysia's conversion to free­
market policies might not have been so broad and so successful. Daim 
was a shrewd deal maker who honored his agreements. 
Before I stepped down as prime minister in 1990, I tried to clear the 
decks for my successor. Drug traffickers travelling on the Malayan 
Railway from Johar Bahm to Singapore had been able to toss drugs out of 
train windows to accomplices waiting at prearranged points. I had there­
fore told Mahathir in 1989 that we intended to move our customs and 
immigration from Tanjong Pagar Station in the south to Woodlands at 
our end of the Causeway, to make checks at the point of entry. I antici­
pated that when this move was completed, passengers would disembark 
at Woodlands and take our MRT trains, buses, or taxis into town. Malay­
sians would be unhappy because, under the law, the land would revert to 
Singapore when it was no longer being used for the railway. I therefore 
proposed to Mahathir that we should redevelop this railway land jointly. 
Mahathir designated Daim Zainuddin to settle the terms with me. After 
several months of negotiations, we finally agreed that there would be 
joint development of three main parcels of land at Tan jong Pagar, Kranji, 
and Woodlands. Malaysia's share would be 60 percent, Singapore's 40 per­
cent. The Points of Agreement (POA) was signed on 27 November 1990, 
a day before I stepped down. As it turned out, I did not succeed in hand­
ing over my office to Goh Chok Tong with a clean slate. 
Three years after the agreement was signed, Daim wrote to me to say 
250 From Third World to First 
that Mahathir thought it was unfair because it did not include a piece of 
railway land at Bukit Timah for joint development. I replied that the 
agreement was fair in that I had given Malaysia 60 percent instead of a 50 
percent share of the three parcels of land. It was a deal done between him 
and me, and it was difficult for Prime Minister Goh to have it reopened. 
Before, during, and after Malaysia, the Malaysians have taken one step 
after another to restrict Singapore's access to their economy. They imposed 
truces and made laws and regulations to reduce or cut off their use of our 
ports, airports, and other services, especially financial services. They 
directed their banks and other borrowers not to raise loans from foreign 
banks in Singapore but to use foreign banks that had branches either in 
Kuala Lumpur or Labuan, a true haven they had set up on an island off 
Sabah. They forced us to become more competitive. 
After 1990, I refrained from official dealings with all Asean govern­
ments, including Malaysia, so as not to cross lines with Prime Minister 
Goh. Unfortunately, for a hearing in chambers in a defamation suit in 
January 1997, I swore in an affidavit that J ohor Bahm was "notorious for 
shootings, muggings and car-jackings. " This caused a furor in Malaysia 
when made public by the defendant who had absconded to Johar. 
The Malaysian government angrily demanded a retraction and an 
apology. I apologized unreservedly . They were not satisfied and wanted 
my statement withdrawn from the court document. I saw no point in 
refusing. I had been careless and put myself offside. In a signed statement, 
I repeated my unreserved apology and stated that I had instructed my 
lawyer to have "the offending words removed from the record." The 
Malaysian cabinet met and announced they had accepted my apology. We 
noticed, however, that they cut off all bilateral contacts and in effect froze 
ties. Mahathir also said that Singapore always made things difficult, as in 
the case of the dispute over railway land. The barrage of protests and 
denunciations continued for several months, and as in the past reached a 
crescendo in threats to cut off our water supplies. 
From 1992 our customs and immigration consulted and negotiated 
with Malayan Railway (KTM) and Malaysian immigration and customs 
to move their railway line to meet our CIQ (customs, immigration, and 
quarantine) post in Woodlands. Prime Minister Mahathir, in April 1992, 
confirmed this when he wrote to Prime Minister Goh, "In fact, we feel 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 251 
that it would be more convenient for both countries to have the same 
checkpoint in Woodland s." However, in 1997, the Malaysians wrote to 
state that they wanted to stay in Tanjong Pagar. 
Singapore replied in July 1997 that they could not remain at Tanjong 
Pagar because it would create serious operational problems for both coun­
tries: People would be cleared by their immigration as having entered 
Malaysia before leaving Singapore. Furthermore, Malaysian officials, oper­
ating in our territory without the presence of Singapore officials to lend 
them authority, had no power to act. 
In last-minute negotiations in July 1998, Malaysian foreign ministry 
officials claimed for the first time that Malaysia had a legal right to have 
their customs and immigration at Tanjong Pagar. We gave them three 
months to put up their written legal arguments for proper consideration. 
When the time came, they asked for an extension to December 1998. 
Prime Minister Mahathir did not make it any easier by the public 
comments he made while he was in Namibia. Shown by Malaysian jour­
nalists the reports of earlier letters and documents that his officials had 
written to our officials agreeing that Malaysia's CIQ would move to 
Woodlands, he said, referring to the POA, "In our opinion it is not 
enough for an international agreement to be signed by just two officials. 
Such agreements have to be approved by the heads of government and rat­
ified by the cabinet and Parliament" (as reported in Malaysian newspapers 
on 28 July 1998). This was an unusual view of the law. Mahathir added 
that Malaysia would not shift its CIQ from Tanjong Pagar to Woodlands, 
that "That's our stand and we will stick to it." [After the dispute became 
public, Jayakumar, our minister for foreign affairs, in a statement in 
Parliament in July 1998 recounted the exchanges between the two gov­
ernments.} 
Older UMNO leaders have not forgotten the intense campaign of 
vituperation and intimidati on they mounted against me in mid-1965. 
They had attacked me then for advocating a Malaysian Malaysia, burnt 
my effigy, and demanded my arrest. This was at a time when they con­
trolled the police and army. I could not afford to give in. They then 
decided to get Singapore out of Malaysia. This barrage could not have 
been for my education. My younger colleagues knew the fireworks were 
intended for them. But they knew what would happen to their political 
252 From Third World to First 
standing if they wobbled. When MPs asked questions, Prime Minister 
Goh and Foreign Minister Jayakumar set out the facts on the railway land 
in Parliament, including the agreement and subsequent letters between 
Daim and me. Goh disclosed that he had told Mahathir the POA was a 
formal agreement and he could not vary its terms. However, within a 
framework of wider cooperation, which included the long-term supply of 
water, he could vary the POA. In the robust debate that followed, a 
younger generation of MPs stood up to be counted. Community leaders 
also made it clear that they were not impressed by Malaysia's methods of 
making friends and influencing neighbors. 
While these exchanges were being traded, I launched the first volume 
of my memoirs, The Singapore Story, on 16 September 1998, my 75th 
birthday. For two Sundays before its launch, Singapore's newspapers car­
ried excerpts of my description of events leading to Singapore's separation 
from Malaysia. This angered Malaysian leaders. A thunderous barrage of 
criticisms and attacks arose from them and their media, that I was "insen­
sitive" to their economic difficulties, choosing a time of economic trou­
bles to publish my memoirs. I had also hurt the feelings of the children of 
the principal actors of the 1960s, in particular Najib Abdul Razak, Tun 
Razak's son who was minister for education, and Syed Hamid Albar, Syed 
Ja'afar Albar's son who was minister for defense. They denied the truth of 
my account of events. Questioned at a press conference, I said I had 
checked and verified my facts, that my words were carefully chosen, and 
that I staked my reputation on the truth of what I had written. Two days 
after that, on 18 September, their minister for defense banned the RSAF 
from flying over their airspace with immediate effect. The Malaysians had 
decided to make it difficult for our planes to reach our training areas in 
the South China Sea after taking off from Singapore airfields. 
The dynamics of Singapore-Malaysia relations have not changed fun­
damentally since our separation on 9 August 1965. Malaysia asked us to 
leave because we stood for a Malaysian Malaysia and they for a Malay­
dominated Malaysia. A multiracial society of equal citizens was unaccept­
able to the UMNO leaders of Malaysia in 1965 and remained unacceptable 
in 1999. In May that year Malaysian opposition leader, Lim Kit Siang, 
revived the concept of a Malaysian Malaysia. Mahathir reacted sharply to 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 253 
say it was a threat to their (Malay) identity, because Malaysia was previ­
ously called Tanah Melayu (Malay land). Two months later (Straits Times, 30 
July 1999) he said that if Malaysia were forced to adopt a system of meri­
tocracy as advocated by the West, it would terminate the process imple­
mented by the government to bridge the gap among the races. The gov­
ernment, through the New Economic Policy, had provided assistance to 
Malays in the fields of business and education, and many of them now held 
important positions, for example as professors and vice chancellors. He 
said, "If it is abolished, I am sure that the Malays and the bumiputras will 
become manual workers and will not be able to hold high positions they 
are holding today .... Many bumipurras will lose their jobs, their children 
will not be able to go to universities and will not be able to become profes­
sors and lecturers." He also lamented that Malay students shunned science­
based courses in favor of Malay and religious studies. 
Mahathir was determined to redress the economic balance between 
the races. Unfortunately, when the financial crisis struck, many Malay 
entrepreneurs were badly hurt because they had over-borrowed during the 
boom in the stock and property markets. Only Mahathir had the courage 
to tell his Malays (Straits Times, 6 August 1999): 
In the past, the country had wasted a lot of resources training 
unqualified individuals. We had not taken into account the capa­
bilities of those given opportunities or exposed them to enough 
experiences. Because of this, many of our efforts have failed and 
there was wastage. Although there were successes, they did not 
meet the investments put in .... In the previous two policies­
the National Economic Council Policy and New Development 
Policy-the focus had been to churn out local bumiputra busi­
nessmen. Now we want to mould world-class entrepreneurs. 
In October 1999, Mahathir called on the Associated Chinese Cham­
bers of Commerce and Industry in Malaysia to assist bumiputras to make 
up the loss in their share of national wealth after the economic crisis 
because many bumiputra companies were saddled with debts. "Bumiputra 
businessmen suffered greater losses because they were new in the field and 
254 From Third World to First 
had huge loans to service, forcing some of them to sell their companies to 
Chinese businessmen out of desperation" (Star, 13 October 1999). "We 
not only need to help these businessmen, but also create and groom 
a fresh corps of bumiputra businessmen, and for this, we are asking for 
the cooperation of the Chinese chambers of commerce" (Straits Times, 
13 October 1999). The group's president, Datuk Lim Guan Teik, replied, 
"I think it is fair, as citizens of a multiracial country, that the strong 
should help the weaker" (Straits Times, 13 October 1999). 
At separation, the Tunku did not expect us to succeed. He tried to use 
three levers to impose his will on Singapore : the military, the economy, 
and water. We countered the military leverage by building up the SAE 
We overcame their economic hold by leapfrogging them and the region to 
link up with the industrial countries. As for water, we have alternatives­
our own reservoirs provide about 40 percent of our domestic consump­
tion, and with modern technology for desalination, reverse osmosis, and 
recycling of used water, we can manage. 
To speak of Singapore-Malaysia problems as "historical baggage" is to 
miss the point. If it had been only "historical baggage," then after more 
than 30 years as two independent states, our relations should have stabi­
lized. But the root cause of the recurring problems in Singapore-Malaysia 
relations is our diametrically different approaches to the problems facing 
our two multiracial societies. 
Singapore set out to become a multiracial society of equal citizens, 
where opportunities are equal and a person's contribution is recognized 
and rewarded on merit regardless of race, language, culture, or religion. 
In spite of our meager natural resources, we succeeded, and our policies 
have benefited all our citizens, including our Malays. We have a growing 
middle class of professionals, executives, and businessmen, including 
Malays, who have developed a strong competitive spirit and take pride in 
being what they are on their own merit. Each time we are rated as the best 
airline in Asia, the No. 1 airport, the No. 1 container port, it reminds 
Singaporeans what a cohesive meritocratic multiracial society can achieve, 
better than if we were a Chinese-dominated one and lacked solidarity. 
Ups and Down with Malaysia 255 
This was not what Malaysia's leaders thought would happen when they 
asked us to leave in 1965. 
When UMNO politicians use coded language like "special relation­
ship," or "historic links," or "being insensitive," they are signalling that 
they want Singapore to be obliging and accommodat ing, and not to stand 
on its legal rights. Malaysia's ethnic Chinese and Indian ministers have 
told our ministers that we are too legalistic and do not know how to deal 
with UMNO leaders; that if we are tactful and trust the Malay leaders' 
words, these leaders can be most responsive. This overlooks the difference 
between our responsibilities to our different electorates. Singaporeans 
expect their government to represent their interests in a partnership of 
equal and independent states. 
Hence, the Singapore-Malaysia relationship will continue to have its 
ups and downs. Singaporeans need to take these gyrations with equanim­
ity, neither euphoric when relations are good nor despondent when rela­
tions turn bad. We need steady nerves, stamina, and patience, while qui­
etly standing up for our rights. 
Malaysia had tried to industrialize through import substitution but 
without success. They saw how, with investments from MNCs, we suc­
ceeded. Daim encouraged Mahathir to privatize their inefficient state­
owned enterprises and invite foreign investments; he changed policies and 
succeeded . Mahathir wanted Malaysia to excel, with a better airport and 
container port, a bigger financial center, and a "Multi-Media Super 
Corridor." He has built up-to-date container wharves at Port Kelang and a 
new super airport 75 kilometers (approximately 46 miles) south of Kuala 
Lumpur. This made us reexamine our competitiveness, improve our infra­
structure, and work smarter to increase our productivity. Suddenly , a 
calamitous financial crisis hit all countries in the region and decimated 
currencies, stock markets, and property values. The crisis will eventually 
work itself out and economic growth will resume. 
Despite my differences with him, I made more progress solving 
bilateral problems with Mahathir in the nine years he was prime minis­
ter from 1981 to 1990, when I stepped down, than in the previous 12 
256 From Third World to First 
years with Tun Razak and Hussein Onn as prime ministers. He had the 
decisiveness and political support to override grassroots prejudices to 
advance his country's interests. He had pushed the Malays toward science 
and technology and away from obscurantism. He had the courage to say 
in public that a female doctor using a pencil to examine a male patient 
(which the Muslim religious leaders wanted) was not the way to treat 
patients. Even at the height of his unpopularity during the Anwar-led 
unrest, the people, especially the Malaysian Chinese and Indians, knew 
they had no better alternative to Mahathir leading UMNO and the 
National Front. He had educated the younger Malays, opened up their 
minds with the vision of a future based on science and technology, espe­
cially computers and the Internet, which his Multi-media Super Corridor 
symbolized. The majority of all the Malays and all the Chinese and 
Indians in Malaysia want this future, not a turn toward extreme Islamic 
practices. 
My view appeared to be contradicted by the results of the November 
1999 general election, when Mahathir won with a two-thirds majority of 
the seats but lost the state governments of Kelantan and Terengganu to 
the PAS and some 20 incumbent UMNO MPs. I am not sure if this was 
caused by a shift toward a more Islamic society. The losses were accentu­
ated by the dismissal in September 1998 of Anwar Ibrahim, his deputy 
prime minister and protege of 17 years. Arrested three weeks later under 
the Internal Security Act, he was brought to court after two weeks with a 
black eye, charged with corruption, and sentenced to six years' imprison­
ment. Then he was further charged for sodomy. This change in the rela­
tionship between the two men, both held in high esteem, was too sudden. 
The unsavory disclosures that followed alienated many Malays, especially 
the young. Anwar's wife was able to contest and win election to Anwar's 
seat in Parliament. 
When naming his new cabinet, Mahathir said this would be his last 
term. He has the time to put in place a successor capable of realizing his 
vision of Malaysia in the year 2020 as a modern, high-tech nation. 
Three decades after separation, the close ties of families and friends still 
bind the two peoples. At the end of the day, however deep-seated the dif-
Ups and Down with Malaysia 257 
ferences between the two, both sides know that if they lash out at each 
other without restraint, there is a risk of unscrambling the interracial har­
mony that holds each country's multiracial society together. Malaysia 
needs multiracial tolerance as much as Singapore does. A younger genera­
tion of leaders will soon be in charge in both countries. Free from the per­
sonal traumas of the past, they can make a fresh start at a practical, work­
ing relationship. 
17. Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 
When Indonesia faced separatist rebellions in 195 7, Western arms dealers 
arrived in Singapore to sell weapons to rebels in Sumatra and Sulawesi. The 
Indonesian consul-general, Lieutenant-General Jatikusomo, met me in 
1958 when I was an opposition leader. I assured him that if we became the 
government, these arms dealers would be expelled. When the PAP won the 
1959 general election I kept this promise, and Jatikusomo---a dapper, 
intelligent, courteous, and active Javanese aristocrat-proposed that I con­
solidate our relationship with Jakarta with an official visit. I agreed. 
In August 1960, my delegation and I were taken to the Merdeka 
Palace, once the residence of the Dutch governor-genera l, to meet Presi­
dent Sukarno. He wore a smart beige beribboned uniform and carried a 
field marshal's baton or swagger stick. It was a stifling, warm, and humid 
Jakarta morning, but neither fans nor air-conditionin g were allowed in 
the palace; he disliked them. I could see sweat coming through his shirt 
onto the jacket of his uniform. I was in a lounge suit like the rest of my 
party, and was also sweating copiously. 
He was an outstanding orator and mobilizer of people, a charismatic 
leader. Once, in February 1959, when I was driving from Singapore to 
Fraser's Hill, a seven-hour drive, I had listened to a broadcast as he 
addressed several hundred thousand Indonesians in central Java. I had 
tuned in at 8:30 A.M., then lost him for long periods because radio recep­
tion in a moving car was erratic. But three hours later, when I was in 
Malacca, he was still in full flow-a beautiful voice, so expressive that he 
260 From Third World to First 
had the crowds roaring and shouting with him. I had therefore looked for­
ward to meeting the great man in person. 
Sukarno did most of the talking for some 20 minutes. He spoke in 
Bahasa Indonesia, which is similar to Malay. He asked, "How big is your 
population ?" "One and a half million," I replied. He had 100 million. 
"How many cars do you have?" "About 10,000," I said. Jakarta had 
50,000. I was puzzled but readily conceded that he occupied first place in 
Southeast Asia in terms of size. Then he expounded his political system of 
"guided democracy." The Indonesian people wanted to revolutionize 
everything, including their economy and culture: Western democracy was 
"not very suitable" for them. He had said this in so many speeches before; 
I was disappointed by the insubstantial conversation. 
The Dutch had not left many trained Indonesian administrators and 
professiona ls; there were few institutions that could carry the country 
forward, and three and a half years of Japanese occupation had wrecked 
whatever administration there was. Then the fighting between the Indo­
nesian nationalists and the Durch, which recurred intermittently between 
1945 and 1949, when the Dutch finally conceded independence, had fur­
ther damaged the economy and weakened the infrastructure . National­
ization of foreign enterprises and a nationalistic economic policy under 
Sukarno discouraged foreign trade and investments and impoverished this 
vast, sprawling republic. 
We stayed at the Hotel des Indes in Jakarta, the equivalent of Raffles 
Hotel in Singapore. Alas, when it rained the roof leaked and as a matter of 
routine the staff immediately produced basins and pails to catch the drip­
ping water. When I unthinkingly pulled the door of my bedroom to close 
it, nor realizing chat it had been latched to the wall, the plaster came 
away with the catch for the latch. When I came back that afternoon, the 
damage had been repaired-with a piece of paper that had been pasted 
over it and whitewashed. 
When I asked Lee Khoon Choy, then parliamentary secretary at the 
ministry of culture, to buy me a few Indonesian-English and English­
Indonesian dictionaries, they cost less than two dollars each. Many shops 
were nearly stripped of dictionaries by members of my Singapore party 
who bought them for friends learning Malay. The Indonesian rupiah was 
in a parlous state as a result of inflation. 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 261 
From Jakarta we drove in a motorcade with motorcycle escorts to 
Bogor, formerly the summer resort of the Dutch governor-general, and 
then on to Bandung. From there, we flew to Jogjakarta, an ancient capital 
in central Java, in the president's personal twin-propeller aircraft, a gift 
from the government of the Soviet Union, and bigger than the commer­
cial DC-3 I had flown in. The clock above the aisle had stopped, shaking 
my confidence in Russian technology and Indonesian maintenance. If that 
could happen to a clock on the presidential plane, what about moving 
engine parts? 
Before my departure I issued a joint statement with Prime Minister 
Djuanda on trade and cultural matters. We had had several talks since he 
received me at Jakarta airport. He was an excellent man-able, highly 
educated, realistic, and resigned to the difficulties of his country. We had 
spoken for hours, sometimes in Bahasa Indonesia. During one exchange 
over dinner, I remarked that Indonesia was blessed with very fertile soil, a 
favorable climate, and abundant resources. He looked at me sadly and 
said, "God is for us, but we are against ourselves ." I felt I could do busi­
ness with a man of such honesty and sincerity. I left feeling that we had 
become friends. I could speak Malay and was to him more like an Indo­
nesian peranakan (a local-born Chinese), not a totok, a Chinese-speaking 
Chinese recent immigrant who was less assimilated. 
But as economic conditions deteriorated, Sukarno embarked on more 
foreign adventures. To support his diplomacy with the Afro-Asian world 
he had a sharp if opportunistic foreign minister in Dr. Subandrio. During 
1963, Subandrio often saw me in Singapore, whenever he was in transit. 
As the formation of Malaysia became imminent, he began talking in arro­
gant terms. Sitting beside me on a settee in my office at City Hall one 
morning, he tapped my knee and waved his hand at the window to say, 
"Look at all the tall buildings in Singapore. They are all built with 
Indonesian money, stolen from Indonesians through smuggling. But 
never mind, one day Indonesia will come here and look after this country 
and put this right." By "smuggling, " Subandrio was referring to exports 
through Singapore by their own merchants who evaded Indonesian taxes 
and foreign exchange requirements. 
I understood his feelings, having seen for myself the deplorable con­
ditions of life in Jakarta, where people washed themselves, their clothes, 
262 From Third World to First 
and their rice, and performed their natural functions in its kali or 
canals, in public; I did not dismiss his aspirations to take over Singapore 
as idle talk. 
When we became independent in 1965, Indonesia was in "Confrontation " 
against Singapore and Malaysia. President Sukarno and Dr. Subandrio 
tried to exploit Singapore-Malaysia difficulties by offering Singapore the 
bait of immediate recognition on conditions that would have affronted 
and angered Malaysia. A turning point came several weeks later, on 30 
September, with Gestapu, the Indonesian acronym for Gerakan September 
Tiga Pu/uh (movement of September 30), when General Suharto, leading 
the special forces, put down an attempted coup by their communists. 
With the support of troops under loyal commanders in the army, navy, air 
force, and police, Suharto warned the rebel military forces at the palace 
and at a radio and communication center to surrender peacefully. Daunted 
by a show of force, the rebel forces fled. It was the end of the coup. 
At the time we did not realize how momentous this failed coup was, 
because we were too preoccupied with the gruesome murder of several 
senior Indonesian generals and the killing that followed of thousands 
(estimated at half a million), some of them ethnic Chinese, the alleged 
supporters of the communists. Suharto played it out slowly and subtly, 
like an Indonesian wayang kulit, a performance with puppets shown in sil­
houette as shadows on the screen. So carefully was this shadow play chore­
ographed, so gradual the moves to strip Sukarno of authority, for some 
time we did not see that power had already shifted away from Sukarno to 
Suharto. For more than six months, Suharto did not oust the president, 
but acted in his name to keep up appearances as he quietly gathered the 
levers of power in his hands, removing Sukarno's supporters and weaken­
ing his position. Adam Malik, the new foreign minister, did not show any 
switch in policy. In March 1966, Sukarno signed a presidential decree 
that gave General Suharto power to take all necessary steps to guarantee 
security and preserve stability. I was still not sure that Sukarno was out, 
such was his charismatic hold on his people. It was only a year later, in 
February 1967, that Suharto was formally elected acting president by the 
national assembly. 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 263 
By June 1966, Suharto was sufficiently entrenched co end Confron­
tation simultaneously with Singapore and Malaysia. Bilateral relations 
cook some time co normalize. The Indonesians sent economic fact-finding 
missions co Singapore immediately in June and July 1966, more for pub­
lic relations than for substance. In August, we reciprocated with a trade 
mission. There was some psychological movement forward in a so-called 
"$150 million handshake" when Singapore undertook to provide this ini­
tial sum in private commercial credit to Indonesian traders and allowed 
Bank Negara Indonesia, a state-owned bank, co reopen in Singapore. We 
agreed co resume two-way trade on a nondiscriminatory basis. They re­
opened all Indonesian ports co our ships. They promised that after they 
had made amendments co their laws, they would let our banks open 
Indonesian branches, but none were allowed to open until the 1990s. 
(Those that did open were unlucky. Within six years, by 1997, they were 
mired in Indonesia's financial crisis and the loans they had extended were 
at risk.) 
There were underlying obstacles to the restoration of relations: mis­
conceptions on politics, security, and economics; disagreements over mar­
itime boundaries, sea passage, and the policing of bilateral trade. What 
they called "smuggling" was perfectly legal in Singapore because we were 
a free port. We could not act as their customs officers. We did not fully 
understand them and cook a long time co learn to navigate our way 
through the labyrinths of their administration. 
For some years there was no warmth in our relations and progress was 
slow. They had a tendency to adopt a big brother attitude. In March 
1968, Adam Malik, speaking co the Indonesian community in Singapore , 
disclosed that he had assured me Indonesia was ready co protect Singapore 
against the communists after the British withdrew in 1971: "We shall 
protect them {200 million people of Asean} even if the threat comes from 
Genghis Khan." The language of the joint communique issued at the end 
of his visit was more diplomatic : "to strengthen existing ties on the basis 
of equality and mutual respect and non-interf erence in the domestic 
affairs of each other." 
A few months later, in mid-October 1968, relations plunged disas­
trously when we hanged two Indonesian marine commandos who had been 
sentenced to death for killing three persons when they exploded a bomb in 
264 From Third World to First 
1964 at the Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank branch in Orchard Road. (This 
was described in Chapter 2.) The Indonesian reaction was more violent 
than we had anticipated. A group of 400 uniformed students sacked our 
embassy in Jakarta and the ambassador's residence. The Indonesian troops 
guarding the embassy were conveniently absent. Foreign Minister Adam 
Malik appealed for calm, saying he had no wish to retaliate against 
Singapore! 
There were popular calls for a total shipping and trade boycott and a 
review of bilateral relations. For five minutes, telecommunication services 
to Singapore were suspended. Student mobs also sacked the two remain­
ing Singapore diplomatic residences. The passions aroused spilled over 
into anti-Chinese riots against their own citizens of Chinese origin, in 
Surabaya in central Java and Djambi in Sumatra. 
By the end of October, however, matters seemed to cool down when 
Adam Malik warned that cutting off trade with Singapore would only 
harm Indonesia. He referred to the poor condition of their own port facil­
ities and said, "We should think of our minimal ability." He expressed the 
hope that quarrels would not harm intra-Asean (Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations) harmony, and said that the international image of Indo­
nesia would suffer. There was a partial lifting of the shipping ban, and by 
early November all curbs had been lifted. At the end of November a 
three-man Indonesian parliamentary delegation visited Singapore with a 
mandate to bury the hatchet. 
The chill in relations thawed only very gradually. In July 1970, we 
sent Lee Khoon Choy as ambassador to Jakarta. K. C., as his friends called 
him, was a good linguist, fluent in Bahasa Indonesia, and interested in 
Indonesian arts a_nd culture. He worked hard and successfully, befriending 
the top Indonesian generals who were Suharto's closest aides. They 
wanted to understand us and found him a friendly and well-connected 
interpreter. Gradually he established personal understanding and gained 
their confidence. 
That September, at the Non-Aligned Summit in Lusaka, I met 
Suharto for the first time as we assembled for the meeting. Then I called 
on him at his villa to spend half an hour on pleasantries and to discuss the 
approach to be taken on Cambodia and Vietnam. He asked for my views 
on U.S. involvemen t in Vietnam and was a good listener. An American 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 265 
withdrawal, I said, would have grave implications for stability in the 
region. A communist victory in Vietnam and Cambodia was likely to lead 
to changes in Thailand which had a traditional policy of adjustment to 
and accommodation of new forces. He agreed with me. We found we 
shared some common views about developments and dangers in the 
region. It was a fair start for half an hour. 
A major step forward was made when Major-General Sudjono 
Hoemardani visited me in April 1971. He believed in the supernatural 
and was one of Suharto's confidants on spiritual and mystical matters. 
When faced with big decisions, K. C. reported, Suharto would go to a 
special cave with Hoemardani to meditate before making up his mind. 
We discussed nothing significant for one hour in Bahasa Indonesia, but 
his note taker told K. C. that he was extremely satisfied with the meeting. 
Hoemardani had expected me to be "tough, snobbish, and arrogant" but 
instead found me "friendly, outspoken, and kind." 
A year later, in March 1972, K. C. arranged for Lieutenant-General 
Soemitro, chief of the National Security Command, to drop in quietly 
without his ambassador's knowledge. He did not want his ministry of 
foreign affairs to know of his secret mission for the president. Soemitro, 
who spoke English, went straight to the point. Suharto wanted to clear 
doubts about Singapore's stand on certain problems and to hear from me 
personally. 
He stated the Indonesian view on the Straits of Malacca, that the lit­
toral states should have control over it. I said it had been international 
waters for centuries and that was the basis for Singapore's survival. We 
would go along with Indonesia and Malaysia on measures recommended 
by international bodies for its safety and security. But we would not want 
to be involved in any action to take control of the Straits or levy toll that 
could lead to conflict with the Russians,Japanese, and other big maritime 
nations. Soemitro replied that Indonesia would take measures to exert its 
sovereignty over the Straits, that if the Russians tried to get tough, 
Indonesia would not hesitate to have a confrontation. I must have looked 
unconvinced for he added in a serious tone that the Russians could try to 
occupy Indonesia and they would not succeed. 
A month later Suharto sent General Panggabean, his most senior 
minister and general in charge of defense and security affairs, to see me. 
266 From Third World to First 
He was a bluff, direct-speaking Sumatran Batak, his manner different 
from Suharto's quiet central Javanese ways. 
He said Indonesia had wasted precious time that should have been 
put into economic development. Now the armed forces had to be sub­
servient to the overall economic development of the country. He wanted 
Singapore, as the economically more advanced country, to complement 
their needs. I assured him we had a vested interest in seeing Indonesia 
develop. 
They invited Keng Swee to Indonesia in October 1972, knowing he 
was my closest colleague. He found them less suspicious after my meet­
ings with their three top generals. Further, regular intelligence contacts 
between S. R. Nathan, our head of intelligence, and his Indonesian coun­
terpart, Lieutenant-General Sutupo Juwono, had convinced them that we 
shared their views on the big issues. 
The stage was now set for my visit, scheduled for May 1973. It had been 
carefully prepared. K. C., quoting the Indonesian generals, reported "a 
serious emotional obstacle to sincere friendship." If there was to be gen­
uine friendship with President Suharto, the episode over the hanging of 
the two marines had to be closed with a diplomatic gesture that addressed 
"Javanese beliefs in souls and clear conscience." They proposed that dur­
ing the official wreath-laying at the Kalibata Heroes Cemetery, after pay­
ing my respects to the slain generals of the 196 5 coup, I go to the graves 
of the two marines and scatter flowers on them. K. C. thought this the 
key to an improvement in relations because the Indonesian generals 
placed great store by this gesture. I agreed. 
When I arrived on the morning of 25 May, I was greeted by a full-scale 
guard of honor of the army, navy, air force, and police, who were lined up 
for inspection, and a 19-gun salute. It signalled that a new page was to be 
turned. An editorial in one of their newspapers commented, "A long time 
seems to have been needed to take the one-hour flight from Singapore to 
Jakarta, after various visits to the UK, US, Europe, Japan and Taiwan. 
Only after having roamed the world does Lee Kuan Yew come to Indonesia 
for an official visit." The editor was right. I had first to demonstrate that 
Singapore could survive without living off the economies of Indonesia and 
Indonesia: From Foe co Friend 267 
Malaysia. We were not parasites dependent only on our neighbors. We 
were linking ourselves to the industrial countries, making ourselves useful 
to them, manufacturing their products with their technology, exporting 
them worldwide. We had changed the survival equation. 
The decisive meeting was with Suharto, one-on-one, what he called 
empat mata (four eyes). Just the two of us, without interpreters or note tak­
ers, we could speak frankly. My Malay was adequate for the purpose. 
Although I did not speak elegant Bahasa Indonesia, I understood him and 
could make myself understood. We talked for more than one hour. 
Suharto made clear his determination to get Indonesia moving after 
20 years of neglect. He said he appreciated that Singapore could assist in 
this Herculean task of rebuilding Indonesia and recognized the quality of 
the Singapore leadership. He gave me the impression that he was likely to 
treat us correctly, even cordially, based on a realistic assessment of the rel­
ative strengths and weaknesses of our two countries. 
On my pare, politely and tactfully, I made it clear that we expected to 
be part of Southeast Asia as of right, not on sufferance. We could not yield 
on fundamental interests like free passage through the Straits of Malacca. 
Economic cooperation must be on the basis of a fair quid pro quo, not the 
kind of relationship Indonesian leaders had with their Chinese cukong. 
(These "compradores" had to pander to the needs of their patrons in 
return for franchises or licenses on which they would become wealthy.) I 
said that at the heart of the relationship, the question was whether we 
crusted each ocher's long-term intentions. 
He made clear that Indonesia had no claims co Singapore or Malaysia 
and claimed only those territories that had belonged to the Dutch East 
Indies. He was determined to concentrate on the development of Indo­
nesia, not on foreign adventures. Most important of all, he distrusted the 
communists, especially Chinese communists, who had been the cause 
of much trouble in Indonesia. I said the Chinese communists were out 
to destroy us through their proxy, the Malayan Communist Party. I was 
determined that they should not succeed. I did not want China's influence 
co extend co Southeast Asia. That was the bull point with him. He 
accepted my good faith on this. 
I saw in him a careful, thoughtful man, the exact opposite of Sukarno. 
He was no extrovert. He did not set out to impress people with his ora-
268 From Third World to First 
tory or his medals, although he had many. He maintained a humble, 
friendly appearance, but was clearly a tough-minded man who would 
brook no opposition to what he set out to do. I liked him and felt that I 
could get on with him. 
A year later, in August 197 4, Suharto returned my visit. At the airport I 
reciprocated the welcome he had given me in Jakarta with a 21-gun salute 
and a 400-man guard of honor from the army, navy, air force, and police. The 
highlight of his visit was an exchange of documents of ratification relating to 
Singapore-Indonesia territorial sea boundaries. Once again the key meeting 
was empat mata with Suharto. He made his points in Bahasa Indonesia, with­
out notes. He was so intent on expressing what was on his mind that two 
interruptions for tea and cakes irritated him. First was the "archipelago con­
cept." Indonesia, like several other island nations, claimed territorial juris­
diction over all waters between its islands. Asean members must show soli­
darity and unity in support. (The Association of Southeast Asian Nations had 
been formed in August 1967 in Bangkok with Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand as members. ) Then he gave an assess­
ment of Indonesia's economic prospects and difficulties. 
I replied that Singapore's predominant interest in the archipelago 
concept was freedom of passage. We were a part of Southeast Asia. We 
had been expelled from Malaysia. We had to create a new basis for our 
livelihood, and this required maritime lifelines to America, Japan, and 
Western Europe. Any impediment to free navigation would destroy us. 
Therefore, we could support the archipelago concept provided there was a 
public declaration by Indonesia on the traditional freedom of navigation. 
We made no claims to oil or other mineral resources on the seabed. 
He asked for my views on the war in Vietnam. I said the outlook had 
turned pessimistic since we met a year ago. Nixon had resigned and what­
ever President Ford might want, the U.S. Congress was determined to 
slash aid to Vietnam and Cambodia by half. I doubted that these two 
regimes would last. He appeared sad at my bleak assessment. 
I feared that instability in Thailand, after Vietnam and Cambodia 
became communist, would cause deep problems for Malaysia and Singa­
pore. Singapore might be more than 75 percent Chinese but we were a 
part of Southeast Asia. I would not allow China or Russia to make use of 
us. He was clearly reassured by this. 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 269 
The next day, addressing over 1,000 Indonesian nationals at his 
embassy, he said in the presence of the press that because of Indonesia's 
limited expertise his government was seeking technical help and invest­
ment capital from everywhere, including Singapore. By publicly accept­
ing Singapore as an equal, independent state, one with a contribution to 
make to Indonesia's development, he had signalled a major change in atti­
tude toward Singapore. 
After the fall of Phnom Penh and Saigon, I met Suharto in September 
1975 in Bali. The communists were on the ascendant and the tide looked 
like flowing over the rest of Southeast Asia. Razak had visited Beijing in 
May 197 4 and established diplomatic relations. Malaysia had recognized 
the Khmer Rouge government in Phnom Penh immediately after they 
captured it. With disappointment in his voice, Suharto said he had told 
Razak of Indonesia's bad experiences with Beijing, referring to China's 
support for the Indonesian Communist Party's attempted coup in Sep­
tember 1965. He had said the same to Thai Prime Minister Kukrit Pramoj 
in Jakarta. Then Kukrit visited Beijing in June 1975, two months after the 
fall of Saigon, and established diplomatic relations. Suharto saw things 
getting worse in Malaysia and in Thailand. If Asean continued such dis­
parate policies, each rushing on its own to give recognition to the new 
communist government in Vietnam and to the Khmer Rouge, he believed 
the will to stand up to the communists would be lost. He noted that 
Singapore and Indonesia held similar views and found themselves akin 
temperamentally. We were not overreacting by courting Indochina, or 
making flamboyant speeches as President Marcos had done recently in 
Beijing, praising that communist regime. 
Although the security of Asean was uppermost in our minds, we 
agreed that Asean should emphasize cooperation in the economic and 
political field, and play down security. We would quietly cooperate , espe­
cially on intelligence. Indonesia and Singapore should consolidate their 
respective capabilities and wait for a more propitious time for Asean eco­
nomic cooperation. He did not mention East Timor, which Indonesia was 
to occupy two weeks later. It was a good meeting. When faced with sud­
den reverses in the region, our reactions were similar. 
But three months later, because Singapore abstained in a vote at the 
United Nations on Indonesia's occupation of East Timor, a second chill 
270 From Third World to First 
descended on our relations. Other Asean members had voted with Indo­
nesia. Indonesia's army leaders boycotted our receptions in Jakarta for 
Singapore Armed Forces Day and National Day. Our counsellor in Jakarta 
reported that several generals said Suharto had been more angered than 
over the hanging of the two marines. 
A year passed before personal rapport was reestablished when Suharto 
visited Singapore, unofficially, on 29 November 1976. I said Singapore 
would not put obstacles in the way of Indonesia's day-to-day relations 
with Timar; we accepted Timar as a part of Indonesia, but we could not 
publicly endorse its invasion and occupation. He accepted my position 
that if we had voted with Indonesia we would have sent the world a 
wrong signal about our own security. 
What pleased him was an unrelated matter; I agreed to provide him, 
unofficially, with our trade statistics to help them curtail "smuggling, " 
but asked that they should not be made public. He wanted these trade 
figures to be published. I explained that as our statistical classifications 
were different from theirs, publication would cause more misunderstand­
ing. Suharto was confident he could manage the Indonesian press. Finally, 
he agreed to examine the long-term implications of publication before 
taking this step. Next, we agreed on a submarine telecommunication link 
between Singapore and Jakarta, with the technical details to be worked 
out by officials. 
Although our meeting went well, our ambassador in Jakarta, Rahim 
Ishak, warned that Indonesia ns, both the leaders and the people, viewed 
Singapore as Chinese. He said Indonesian attitudes to Singapore were 
inextricably tied up with their feelings toward their Indonesian ethnic 
Chinese. Singapore, he warned, would be a convenient whipping boy 
whenever there was discontent in Indonesia. This proved to be prophetic 
when Indonesia went into crisis in 1998-1999. 
It was our good fortune that the character, temperament, and objectives of 
President Suharto allowed me to develop good personal relations with 
him. He is a quiet man, courteous and punctilious on form and protocol. 
His character is in keeping with the way he carefully probed and assessed 
Indonesia: From Foe co Friend 271 
my position before my visit to Jakarta. After our second meeting, we had 
confidence in each other. As we met over the years, I found him to be a 
man of his word. He made few promises, but delivered whatever he had 
promised. His forte was his consistency . He is three years older than me, 
broad-faced, broad-nosed, with a somewhat taciturn expression until he 
got to know one, when he would smile frequently and easily. He enjoys 
his food, especially desserts, but made an effort to control his weight 
through walking and golf. Although he speaks calmly and softly, he 
becomes quite animated once he gets going on an important subject. He 
is not an intellectual, but he had the ability to select able economists and 
administrators to be his ministers. He chose Berkeley-educated econo­
mists like Professor Dr. Widjojo Nitisastro and Ali Wardhana, who 
opened up Indonesia to foreign trade and investments and gradually made 
it one of the successful emerging economies. 
Our friendship overcame the many prejudices between Singaporeans 
of Chinese descent and Indonesians. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, 
we met almost every year to keep in touch, exchange views, and discuss 
matters that cropped up. I would explain that language and culture were 
difficult emotional issues I had to handle sensitively. English was our 
common language, but the "Speak Mandarin" campaign was necessary 
because the Chinese in Singapore spoke more than seven different 
dialects. Similarly, Singaporeans of Malayan and Indonesian origin had 
given up Javanese, Boyanese, and Sundanese and were using only Malay. 
As for cheering for the Chinese badminton team against Indonesia, it was 
the stupidity of vociferous pro-China groups who had even booed their 
own Singapore ping-pong players when they played against players from 
China, the world champions. He accepted my view that over the long 
term the Chinese in Singapore would become Singaporean in outlook. 
Suharto wanted to develop Batam, an island 20 kilometers (approxi­
mately 12 miles) south of Singapore and two-thirds its size, into a second 
Singapore. He proposed in 1976 that I help Indonesia to develop Batam. 
The infrastructure was inadequate and it had only a small population of 
fisherfolk. He sent his newly appointed adviser on technology, Dr. B. J. 
272 From Third World to First 
Habibie, to see me. Habibie's mission was to develop Batam. I encour­
aged him to use Singapore as the dynamo, but explained that Batam 
needed the infrastructure of roads, water, power, and telecommunications, 
and the removal of administrative bottlenecks. If Habibie could get the 
Indonesian economic and trade ministers to finance this project, I prom­
ised to make the passage of goods and people between Batam and Singa­
pore free of red tape so that Batam could plug itself into Singapore's eco­
nomic power grid. 
It took some years for the Indonesian press to recognize that invest­
ments in Batam had to be made by businessmen who would assess for 
themselves what was feasible and profitable. In Indonesia all major proj­
ects were the result of government investments, whether steel mills, 
petrochemicals, or cement plants. I had to explain repeatedly that the 
Singapore government could facilitate the movement of capital, material, 
and personnel between Singapore and Batam, and could encourage but 
not direct our entrepreneurs to invest. 
I tried to persuade Suharto to allow 100 percent foreign equity own­
ership of investments in Batam when their products were entirely for 
export. When we met in October 1989, Suharto said he would allow 
firms producing entirely for export to have 100 percent foreign equity 
ownership for the initial five years, but after that they would have to 
divest a part of it to Indonesians. It was not as attractive as what Singa­
pore offered but enough to draw some factories in Singapore that were 
feeling the pressure of our higher costs to move to Batam. One of our 
government-linked companies, Singapore Technologies Industrial Corpo­
ration, formed a joint venture with an Indonesian group to develop a 500-
hectare industrial park in Batam and actively promoted it among MNCs 
as well as our own industrialists. It turned out a success. By November 
1999, the park had generated US$1.5 billion of investments, employing 
over 74,000 Indonesians. It had continued growing in spite of the finan­
cial crisis that struck Indonesia in 1997. 
This led to cooperation on the neighboring islands of Bintan and 
Karimun. Then Suharto proposed that we channel our 7 million annual 
tourists into Indonesia. Tourism cooperation spread throughout Indonesia 
with our airlines getting the right to fly to tourist destinations which we 
jointly developed. 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 273 
As with most things, there was a negative side. Many of our Indo­
nesian partners were ethnic Chinese, creating an undercurrent of resent­
ment. We set out to find pribumi (indigenous) Indonesian partners. It 
was difficult because their successful entrepreneurs were ethnic Chinese, 
but we did manage to have joint ventures with several pribumi. 
At all our meetings, Suharto and I would always make time to meet 
empat mata, when we could have uninhibited free-ranging discussions, and 
I would test out ideas which he could reject without any embarrassment. 
This made for rapport and confidence. I had assured him that we would 
not establish diplomatic relations with China until Indonesia had done so. 
So, before Singapore exchanged commercial offices with China, I met him 
personally to explain that this was an exchange of commercial representa­
tion to facilitate trade and did not amount to diplomatic representation. 
He accepted this. 
By the mid-1980s, the Indonesians had swung around to the view 
that, far from being a supporter of China, we had in fact consistently 
stood up for our interests as Southeast Asians. Our economic relations had 
also improved. Indonesia had opened up all its ports to all ships and 
relaxed its rules for import and export. They no longer harbored suspi­
cions of "smuggling" to Singapore. (Of course there were new complaints, 
that Indonesian traders were smuggling, from Singapore into Indonesia, 
electronic and other consumer durables to avoid paying high import 
duties. But this was an Indonesian customs problem for which we could 
not be blamed.) Also, Singapore's role as middleman for Indonesia's trade 
with China had ceased to be an issue because Indonesia had opened direct 
trade with China. 
Good relations at the top between Suharto and me led Benny Moerdani, 
the Indonesian minister for defense and security in the 1980s, to propose 
and implement the development of the joint Siabu Air Weapons Range, 
near the Sumatran town of Pekan Baru, for use by our two air forces. It was 
officially opened by the two chiefs of defense forces in 1989, marking a 
milestone in our defense relations. 
When I met Suharto at the funeral of Emperor Hirohito in Tokyo in 
February 1989, he informed me of a development that would lead Indo­
nesia to restore diplomatic relations with China: China was prepared to 
state clearly and publicly that it would not interfere in Indonesia's inter-
274 From Third World to First 
nal affairs, either at party-to-party or government-to-government level. 
After Indonesia restored diplomatic ties with China in August 1990, 
Singapore did likewise when I visited Beijing that October. 
A few days before I resigned as prime minister, I met Suharto when in 
Tokyo for the installation of Emperor Akihito in November 1990. His 
wife, lbu Tien, was incredulous that I wanted to stand down when I was 
fit and healthy and three years younger than her husband. I explained that 
Singapore had never had a change in prime minister, and that it was bet­
ter for me to leave at a time of my own choosing, when conditions were 
most favorable. 
Our bilateral relations over the years from 1965 depended first on 
getting the measure of each other and learning to coexist. There were 
always problems to overcome, but we could resolve them, or work around 
them or set them aside, to be resolved later. In retrospect, an Indonesian 
president with a character and temperament more like Sukarno's would 
have been difficult to get close to and work with. Then the history of this 
period would have been different for Indonesia, and probably for the 
whole of Southeast Asia. 
Suharto's wife died in April 1996. When my wife and I called on him 
that November, he looked bereft and forlorn. By June 1997, when we 
next saw him in Jakarta, he had regained his composure, but there was a 
significant change. His children had got closer to him. When we met 
Suharto's daughters at a royal wedding in Brunei on 18 August 1996, 
they were loaded with jewelry. Choo remarked to our ambassador's wife 
that she had not noticed this before. The ambassador's wife, who knew 
them well having spent years in Jakarta in her husband's previous post­
ing, said that when their mother was alive she had restrained them, but 
after her death that restraint had gone, and they were showing off their 
jewels. 
No one expected the Indonesian rupiah crisis. When the Thai central 
bank stopped defending the Thai baht on 2 July 1997, the contagion 
spread to all currencies of the region as panic swept fund managers into a 
sellout of the regions' shares and currencies. Wisely, the Indonesian 
finance minister called upon the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 275 
help. Before he seeded with the IMF at the end of October 1997, 
President Suharto, through an emissary, asked Prime Minister Goh for 
support co improve his bargaining position with the IMF. Goh discussed 
chis with Finance Minister Richard Hu and me before caking it co the 
cabinet. We were fairly confident chat the Indonesian economy was in 
better health than Thailand's. They had no big deficits either in their cur­
rent account or budget, a modest reported foreign debt, and low inflation. 
So, we agreed co support chem up to US$5 billion, bur only after 
Indonesia had exhausted some US$20 billion of loans from the IMF, the 
World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and their own reserves. 
Singapore also promised co intervene in the foreign exchange market co 
support the rupiah once Indonesia had reached agreement with the IMF. 
The IMF package for Indonesia amounted co US$40 billion. Japan also 
agreed co support Indonesia up co US$5 billion. Immediately after the 
agreement with the IMF was signed, the central banks of Indonesia, 
Japan, and Singapore, working in consultation, intervened co raise the 
value of the rupiah from 3,600 co 3,200 co the U.S. dollar. Before the cri­
sis the rupiah had been 2,500 co the U.S. dollar. 
This improvement was undermined when President Suharto rein­
stated some of the 14 major infrastructure projects chat had been can­
celled as agreed with the IMF. They included a power station in which his 
eldest daughter, Sici Hardiyanti Rukmana (Tucuc), had an interest. Also, 
one of the 16 insolvent banks chat had been closed (it was owned by the 
president's son) was allowed co be revived under a different name. The 
market reacted by selling off the rupiah. These 16 banks were only a small 
pare of a much larger problem: There were over 200 banks, many of chem 
small, poorly managed and inadequately supervised. Further, contrary co 
the agreement with the IMF, the monetary policy was eased. To add co the 
loss of confidence, the president of the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce 
announced char President Suharto had agreed co use the US$5 billion 
fund from Singapore co make low-interest loans available co indigenous 
companies suffering from the credit squeeze. Worse, Suharto became 
unwell in December 1997 after the exhaustion of his overseas travels. 
Alarmed at the rapid decline of the value of the rupiah, I cold our 
ambassador in Jakarta co ask Tucuc if she could meet me in Singapore co 
convey my views co her father. I had lase seen her in June 1997 when I 
276 From Third World to First 
called on her father in Jakarta. Prime Minister Goh and I met her in 
Singapore at the lstana Villa on Christmas Day, 1997. We explained the 
grave situation for Indonesia if confidence was not restored, first in her 
father's health and next in his willingness to implement the IMF condi­
tions. I strongly urged her and her siblings to understand that interna­
tional fund managers in Jakarta had focused on the economic privileges 
the president's children were enjoying; during this period of crisis, it was 
best if they withdrew completely from the market and did not engage in 
any new projects. I asked her point-blank whether she could get this mes­
sage understood by her siblings. She answered with equal frankness that 
she could not. To make sure she understood the implications of market 
analysts' daily reports, I sent her through our ambassador in Jakarta a 
copy of the daily collection of important reports. To judge from the 
actions of the Suharto children, it had no effect on them. 
On 6 January 1998, President Suharto delivered the Indonesian 
budget, which had not been discussed with the IMF and did not meet 
targets earlier agreed in the IMF package. In the next two days the 
Indonesian rupiah dropped from 7,500 to 10,000 to the U.S. dollar 
because both the IMF deputy managing director, Stanley Fischer, and 
the U.S. deputy secretary for the treasury, Lawrence Summers, had criti­
cized the budget as not being in accordance with the IMF terms. At 
9:00 P.M. on 8 January, I heard over the radio that in a frenzy of panic 
buying, crowds in Jakarta had cleaned out all shops and supermarkets to 
get rid of their melting rupiah and to stock up. I phoned our ambas­
sador in Jakarta who confirmed the news, adding that a supermarket 
had been burnt down, and the rupiah was trading in the streets at a low 
of 11,500 to the U.S. dollar. 
I alerted Prime Minister Goh, who immediately sent a message to the 
U.S. State Department and the IMF, suggesting that they issue state­
ments to restore calm in the markets or risk disorder the following day. A 
few hours later, at 7:00 A.M. Singapore time, President Clinton phoned 
Prime Minister Goh to discuss the latest siruation and then spoke to 
President Suharto. Clinton announced that he was sending Summers to 
help sort out the problems. Meanwhile, Fischer issued a statement that 
the reaction was excessive. This flurry of activity held out hopes of a pos­
sible solution and stopped what would have ended in riots and disorder. 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 277 
On 15 January, President Suharto himself signed a second IMF package 
stipulating more reforms. 
On 9 January 1998, a few days before that second agreement, 
Suharto's second daughter, Siti Hediati Hariyadi Prabowo (Titiek), the 
wife of Major-General Prabowo Subianto, commander of Kopassus (their 
red beret forces for special operations), saw me in Singapore. She came 
with her father's knowledge ; she wanted our help to raise U.S. dollar 
bonds in Singapore. An international banker had said the dollars raised 
would help stabilize the rupiah. I said that in the present crisis atmo­
sphere, when the market had doubts about the rupiah, the failure of a 
bond issue would cause a further loss of confidence. Then she complained 
of rumors from Singapore that had weakened the rupiah, and added that 
our bankers were encouraging Indonesians to park their money here. 
Could we stop it? I explained that this would be totally ineffective since 
Indonesians could get their money out of Indonesia to anywhere in the 
world by a touch of the computer key. Moreover, rumors could not affect 
the rupiah if the fundamentals were strong. To restore market confidence, 
her father had to be seen to implement the IMF reforms. If he felt that 
some conditions were impractical or too harsh, then he could invite a per­
son such as Paul Volcker, the former U.S. Federal Reserve chairman, to be 
their adviser. The IMF was likely to listen seriously to arguments from 
Volcker. That message got through-a banker told me later that Volcker 
did go to Jakarta, but after meeting Suharto left without becoming an 
adviser. 
Suharto's problems had been compounded by the increasing intrusion 
of his children into all lucrative contracts and monopolies. The IMF tar­
geted several of them for dismantling, including the clove monopoly and 
a national car monopoly run by his son Tommy, the power station con­
tract to his daughter Tutut, and banking licenses to other sons, to name 
just a few. Suharto could not understand why the IMF wanted to interfere 
with his internal affairs. In fact, these monopolies and concessions had 
become major issues with the fund managers. Also, his top technocrats 
saw Indonesia's financial crisis as an opportunity to dismantle practices 
that had weakened the economy and increased dissatisfaction. Most of all, 
the IMF was aware that the U.S. Congress would not vote for more funds 
to replenish its coffers if it did not stop these practices. 
278 From Third World to First 
The crucial factor that affected the outcome was America's view, 
which Summers expressed to my prime minister and me on 11 January 
1998, in Singapore, on his way to Indonesia. What was needed, he said, 
was a "discontinuity" in the way Suharto conducted his government. The 
privileges for his family and friends had to stop. There should be a level 
playing field. I pointed out that it was best to have continuity for no suc­
cessor president could be as strong as Suharto to enforce the tough condi­
tions the IMF required. So we should help Suharto implement IMF condi­
tions and work toward the optimum outcome, namely get the president 
to appoint a vice president who would restore the confidence of the mar­
ket in the future of post-Suharto Indonesia. This view was not shared by 
the Clinton administration. They were adamant on the need for democ­
racy and an end to corruption and human rights violations. The Cold War 
was over. They saw no reason to "mollycoddle " Suharto (Clinton's words 
in his 1992 campaign). 
Two months later, in March 1998, former U.S. Vice President Walter 
Mondale carried a message from Clinton to Suharto. He then met Prime 
Minister Goh and me in Singapore on his way home. After comparing 
notes on Suharto's likely course of action on reforms, Mondale tossed this 
question at me: "You knew Marcos. Was he a hero or a crook? How does 
Suharto compare to Marcos? Is Suharto a patriot or a crook?" I felt 
Mondale was making up his mind on Suharto's motivations before sub­
mitting his recommendations to his president. I answered that Marcos 
might have started off as a hero but ended up as a crook. Suharto was dif­
ferent. His heroes were not Washington or Jefferson or Madison, but the 
sultans of Solo in central Java. Suharto's wife had been a minor princess of 
that royal family. As the president of Indonesia, he was a megasultan of a 
megacountry. Suharto believed his children were entitled to be as privi­
leged as the princes and princesses of the sultans of Solo. He did not feel 
any embarrassment at giving them these privileges, because it was his 
right as a megasultan. He saw himself as a patriot. I would not classify 
Suharto as a crook. 
Prime Minister Goh visited Suharto three times, in October 1997 and 
January and February 1998, to explain that Indonesia's economy was in 
serious crisis and he had to take IMF reforms seriously or the market 
would sell off his currency and stocks and cause a collapse. When he came 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 279 
back from his final meeting in February 1998 he told me that Suharto 
acted as if he was under siege, believing that the West wanted him out. 
Goh had expressed concern to Suharto that if economic conditions wors­
ened, there would be food shortages, social unrest, and a loss of confidence 
in Indonesia. The president would then face grave difficulties. Hence it 
was important to stabilize the economy with IMF support. Suharto's 
response was a confident assertion that the army was fully behind him. 
Goh hinted that there could be circumstances in which the people would 
be so hungry that the soldiers would not shoot. Suharto dismissed this 
possibility. He was sadly out of touch. At that time, one Indonesian gen­
eral had said (this was reported in March by the U.S. ambassador to ours), 
"If the students were a thousand, they will be clobbered. If they were 
10,000, ABRI will try to control the crowd. But if they were 100,000, 
ABRI will join the ranks of the students." 
Several further actions that President Suharto took caused Indonesia's 
currency and stocks to slide downward in spite of his signing a second 
IMF agreement in January 1998. Later that month, news in the Indo­
nesian press of the president's criteria for the post of vice president led 
people to believe that B. J. Habibie was the favored candidate. He was 
known for high-cost, high-tech projects like the building of airplanes. 
Several foreign leaders were worried by this and went to see Suharto, qui­
etly, to advise against such a choice. They included the former Australian 
prime minister, Paul Keating, whom Suharto considered a good friend, 
Prime Minister Goh, and Malaysian Deputy Prime Minister Anwar 
Ibrahim. Daim Zainuddin, economic adviser to the Malaysian govern­
ment, wrote to me at the end of January 1998 to ask me to see Suharto 
and persuade him against this appointment of Habibie because the presi­
dent's ministers had said that Suharto needed to be advised by his neigh­
bors. I could not go to Jakarta in the middle of a crisis and be seen to 
interfere. Instead I took a calculated risk and, in a speech on 7 February in 
Singapore, cautioned, "The market was disturbed by his [President 
Suharto's} criteria for the vice president that required a mastery of science 
and technology, announced shortly after the second IMF agreement .... If 
the market is uncomfortable with whoever is the eventual vice president, 
the rupiah would weaken again." Although I had not referred to him by 
name, Habibie's supporters attacked me for this statement. 
280 From Third World to First 
When Suharto proceeded with the appointment, fund managers and 
foreign exchange dealers reacted as expected. They sold the rupiah short, 
and it skidded to 17,000 rupiah to the U.S. dollar, dragging down the 
regional currencies and stock markets. 
In early February 1998, Bambang, the president's son, brought Steve 
Hanke, an American economics professor from Johns Hopkins University, 
to meet Suharto to advise him that the simple answer to the low exchange 
value of the rupiah was to install a currency board. While he publicly 
toyed with the currency board idea, the rupiah seesawed. The market was 
losing confidence in a president hitherto well regarded for his experience 
and judgment. 
Suharto's last major military and ministerial appointments in 
February and March 1998 were the most disastrous misjudgments of his 
life. He appointed B. J. Habibie as vice president because, as he said 48 
hours before he resigned, nobody would want Habibie as president. 
Suharto believed that no one in Indonesia and no foreign power would 
conspire to remove him if they knew Habibie would then be president. 
His golfing partner, Bob Hasan, a timber baron, was made minister for 
trade and industry, and his daughter Tutut, minister for social welfare. 
Nearly all the others appointed as ministers were loyalists either to him or 
his children. The most grievous error of all was his balancing act in 
appointing General Wiranto as chief of the armed forces while promoting 
his son-in-law Prabowo Subianto to be lieutenant-general and chief of 
Kostrad (the Strategic Forces). He knew that Prabowo was bright and 
ambitious, but impetuous and rash. 
I had met Prabowo at two lunches in Jakarta, in 1996 and 1997. He 
was quick but inappropriate in his outspokenness. On 7 February 1998, 
he saw me and Prime Minister Goh separately in Singapore to deliver a 
strange message, that the Chinese in Indonesia were at risk because in any 
trouble-riots-they would be hurt as a minority, and Sofyan Wanandi, a 
well-known successful Indonesian Chinese businessman active in politics, 
was in grave danger as a "double minority," a Chinese and a Catholic. 
Sofyan had said to him and several other generals that President Suharto 
had to step down. When I expressed my disbelief, Prabowo insisted 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 281 
Sofyan did say this, and that the Chinese Catholics were a danger to them­
selves. Both the prime minister and I puzzled over why he should want to 
tell us this about Sofyan when it was patently unlikely that any Indo­
nesian would tell the president 's son-in-law that the president should be 
forced to step down. We wondered if he was preparing us for something 
that would happen soon to Sofyan and other Chinese Indonesian business­
men. 
On 9 May 1998, Admiral William Owens, a recently retired 
vicechairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, saw me in Singapore. He 
told me of the strange statements Prabowo had made when they met in 
Jakarta the day before. Over lunch, in the presence of his two young aides, 
both lieutenant-colonels, one a doctor, Prabowo said in effect that "the 
old man may not last nine months, maybe he'll die." In a happy mood, 
celebrating his promotion to three stars and head of Kostrad, he joked 
about talk going around that he himself might attempt a coup. Owens 
said that although Prabowo had known him for two years, he was none­
theless a foreigner. I said Prabowo had a reckless streak in him. 
For several months from January 1998, student protests were con­
fined to their campuses where faculty members and former ministers and 
generals openly addressed them to add their voices to the demand for 
reforms. To show he was in complete control, Suharto left ostentatiously 
in the middle of a crisis, on 9 May 1998, to attend a conference in Cairo. 
Inevitably the students took their demonstrations to the streets and after 
several clashes with riot police, on 12 May six students of Trisakti 
University were shot as they retreated into their campus. The outrage that 
followed led to a complete collapse of law and order as police and soldiers 
surrendered the city to mobs that rampaged, looted, and burned ethnic 
Chinese shops and homes and raped their women. It was general knowl­
edge that the rioting was engineered by Prabowo's men. He wanted to 
show up Wiranto as incompetent, so that on Suharto's return from Cairo, 
he (Prabowo) would be made chief of the armed forces. By the time he 
returned from Cairo on 15 May, Suharto's position was lost. 
One after another, the closest and most loyal of his aides and ministers 
deserted him after his most obedient of subordinates, Harmoko, whom he 
had appointed Speaker of the national assembly, publicly demanded his 
resignation. The drama ended on 21 May at 9:00 A.M. when Suharto 
282 From Third World to First 
appeared on television to announce his resignation and B. J. Habibie was 
sworn in as president. 
What started as an economic problem needing an IMF rescue had 
ended in the overthrow of the president. It was an immense personal 
tragedy for a leader who had turned an impoverished Indonesia of 1965 
into an emerging tiger economy, educated his people, and built the infra­
structure for Indonesia's continued development. At this crucial moment, 
the man who had been so good at judging and choosing his aides had cho­
sen the wrong men for key positions. His mistakes proved disastrous for 
him and his country. 
Suharto never contemplated exile. The fortunes he and his family had 
were invested in Indonesia. The American journalist who had reported in 
Forbes magazine that the Suharto family had US$42 billion of assets, told 
me in New York in October 1998 that the bulk of it was in Indonesia . 
After the Indonesian meltdown, he estimated them to be worth a mere 
US$4 billion. Unlike Marcos of the Philippines, Suharto did not spirit his 
wealth outside his country in readiness for a quick exit. He remained in his 
home in Jakarta. After 32 years as the president, he was not about to run 
away. I did not understand why his children needed to be so rich. But for 
their excesses he would have had a different place in Indonesia's history. 
General Benny Moerdani, his trusted, loyal, and long-serving head of 
the armed forces intelligence agency and later commander in chief of the 
armed forces, told me in the late 1980s that he had advised Suharto to 
rein in his children's endless demands for more business privileges. Had 
he listened to Moerdani, Suharto would not have had this tragic end. 
I watched a telecast of his resignation. He deserved a more graceful 
exit. Suharto had concentrated his energies on stability and the economy. 
His policies created the conditions for strong economic growth from the 
1970s to the 1990s in all Asean countries. They were golden years for 
Southeast Asia. 
Although a president by accident, Habibie believed it was his destiny 
to rule Indonesia. He is highly intelligent, but mercurial and voluble. In 
the Asian Wall Street Journal (4 August 1998) he described his working 
style as "parallel processing on 10 to 20 issues," comparing himself to a 
computer. He also complained that when he took office on 21 May 1998, 
Indonesia: From Foe co Friend 283 
he received congratulations from many nations by the next day, but 
Singapore did not send theirs until "almost June, very late. It's OK with 
me, but there are 211 million people [in Indonesia}. Look at the map. All 
the green [area} is Indonesia. And that red dot is Singapore. Look at that." 
(Singapore had sent its congratulations on 25 May.) A few days later 
Prime Minister Goh responded in his National Day Rally speech that 
Singapore had only the resources of 3 million people and there were limits 
to what "a little red dot" like Singapore could do for its neighbors. 
We knew Habibie well because he had been in charge of Batam's 
cooperation with Singapore. He was against the Chinese Indonesians and 
by extension against Singapore with its Chinese majority. He wanted to 
treat us as he did his Chinese Indonesian cukong, to be pressured and 
milked. This would change the basis upon which Suharto and I had coop­
erated as equal, independent states to an abang-adik (big brother-little 
brother) relationship. But privately, Habibie sent repeated messages to 
the prime minister to visit him in Jakarta and also invited Loong (the 
deputy prime minister) and his wife for dinner. He wanted Singapore's 
leaders to be seen to support him, in the belief, we were told, that Chinese 
Indonesian business leaders would then have confidence in him and 
invest. We did not see how that would result from such visits. 
Two days after his reported outburst, he gave an 80-minute lecture to 
Teo Chee Hean, our minister for education and second minister for 
defense. Teo had delivered humanitarian aid to Jakarta, to General 
Wiranto, the Indonesian armed forces commander. In Teo's words: 
Habibie was animated, his arms waving about as the expression 
on his face and the tone of his voice changed rapidly. He could 
hardly sit still, sounding passionate and looking agitated. 
Habibie alternated between highlighting his achievements, his 
special qualities, and making thinly veiled threats against Singa­
pore. He recounted that he had lived for 25 years in Europe, from 
the age of 18, and had acquired values such as "democracy and 
human rights." 
Habibie wanted Singapore to know its place and realise its 
vulnerability. So he proceeded to point out how "Singapore lies 
284 From Third World to First 
inside {Indonesia}." Jumping up from his seat to dash over to the 
map on the wall, he stretched out both arms to emphasise the 
green expanse of Indonesia surrounding the 'red dot' that was 
Singapore. 
Later, on the night of 27 January 1999, as I was leaving for Davos, I 
was startled to hear the news on radio that Habibie had decided East 
Timar would be given the right to choose between full autonomy and 
independence. It was a sudden reversal of a policy Indonesia had strenu­
ously upheld since 1976, that the incorporation of East Timar into 
Indonesia was irreversible. 
In Davos, I met Stanley Roth, the shrewd, constantly travelling and 
indefatigable U.S. assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific 
affairs. We agreed that Habibie's offer, once made, had permanently 
changed the equation, and independence for East Timar could be 
expected. Roth's dry comment was that prime ministers should not be so 
free in writing letters, especially to a president like Habibie. (Both of us 
had read reports that Habibie's decision had been triggered off by a letter 
from Australian Prime Minister John Howard, proposing a referendum 
for the East Timorese to decide their future.) 
Shortly after this announcement on East Timar, on 4 February 1999, 
Mah Bow Tan, our minister for communications, called on Habibie who 
recounted how the Australian ambassador had informed him of the "New 
Caledonia " approach: to organize a referendum and be prepared to grant 
independence after a 15-year period of preparation. Habibie had told the 
Australian ambassador that Indonesia was not prepared for this approach. 
It had gained nothing in terms of natural resources, human resources, or 
gold from East Timar, and the Australians did not have the right to insist 
that Indonesia grant autonomy or the right of self-determination to East 
Timar. 
"The world doesn't understand and always character-assassinates us," 
Habibie said to Mah. He was "fed up and tired" of this and had asked his 
cabinet to study the possibility of releasing East Timar-give them a 
choice, autonomy or independence. Should they refuse to accept auton­
omy but at the same time seek Indonesian help to prepare for indepen­
dence, then he would have to say "sorry." He was not prepared to be East 
Indo nesia: From Foe to Friend 285 
Timor's "rich uncle." He had asked the ambassador to convey this to 
Australian Prime Minister John Howard. Hence the letter from Howard 
to him in January 1999 had contained Habibie's ideas on East Timar. 
When he received it, he had immediately scribbled at the sides of the rel­
evant paragraphs commending the idea to his cabinet. Thus was set in 
motion a chain of events that marked a turning point in the history of 
Indonesia. 
I had confirmation of the manner in which he decided on East Timar 
when I met Ginandjar Kartasasmita, the able Indonesian coordinating 
minister for economic affairs, on an aircraft from Singapore to Zurich, the 
night of the announcement. We were seated across the aisle from each 
other, both headed for the World Economic Forum in Davos, and got into 
an hour-long discussion of economic and political developments in 
Indonesia. But uppermost on his mind was East Timar. He recounted 
how the decision had been taken after the matter was raised for the first 
time in cabinet only that afternoon, based on Habibie's memo. The dis­
cussion lasted two hours after which all ministers including General 
Wiranto, the defense minister, agreed to the president's proposal. He 
asked with a trace of anxiety in his voice if it would have other conse­
quences for Indonesia. I replied diplomatically that I could not say for 
sure but that it was a most significant policy change. 
Habibie's advisers had believed this offer of autonomy or indepen­
dence to East Timar would win him financial support from the IMF and 
the World Bank, and acclaim in the United States and the European 
Union as a democrat and a reformer. This would help his reelection. In 
fact he had agitated his generals, many of whom had spent years pacifying 
East Timar. Ginandjar told Prime Minister Goh in Auckland during an 
APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) meeting in August that they 
had made a mistake in February 1999 in arming the militias. The inten­
tion had been to "persuade " the East Timorese not to vote for indepen­
dence. When the East Timorese did so by an overwhelming majority of 
80 percent out of nearly 99 percent of votes cast, East Timar was torched 
and devastated, ostensibly by the militias. Habibie's standing as an Indo­
nesian nationalist was damaged, and the reputation of the Indonesian 
armed forces and the government suffered. \. 
To help Habibie win reelection, his team of advisers had presented 
286 From Third World to First 
him as a reformer who wanted a break with the past. He released political 
detainees. He allowed over 50 political parties to be registered instead of 
the three under Suharto. He also met the press frequently and spoke 
freely, too freely. His choreographers reined him in and put him on a tight 
leash, stopping him from ad-libbing. He needed money to get support. 
Officials expected major changes after the elections. Fearful of being 
transferred out to jobs with fewer opportunities for bribes, they made the 
most of this interregnum. There was more corruption at all levels than 
during the worst of the Suharto years. The opportunities for graft were 
immense because many banks and large companies were insolvent and 
depended on government rescue schemes, opening them to pressure. One 
of these was Bank Bali where some US$70 million had been siphoned off 
by Habibie's closest associates. The IMF and the World Bank withheld 
funds for Indonesia until a thorough audit had been made and the wrong­
doers punished. Habibie blocked the publication of the auditor's report 
on the grounds that it breached Indonesia's banking secrecy rules. The 
Indonesian media reported that the money had been traced to members of 
his family. 
Nevertheless, for his presidential bid he mobilized all the support his 
Muslim reputation and presidential patronage could muster. He had aides 
who put a spin on his wobbly performance. He refused to give up in spite 
of pressure from the media, leaders of opposition political parties, and his 
own Golkar party. He said he was not a coward. He would only withdraw 
when he was rejected by the MPR (People's Consultative Assembly). He 
was. In the early hours of 20 October, the MPR rejected his accountabil­
ity speech by 355 votes to 322. Those familiar with wheeling and dealing 
in Indonesian politics told me that they had never seen so much money 
pass to so many MPR representatives in so short a time. Habibie gave up 
the fight. 
Habibie's withdrawal from the contest led to dramatic last-minute 
changes in alliances that affected the fortunes of the two main contenders 
for the presidency , Abdurrahman Wahid, or Gus Dur (elder brother Dur) 
as his followers affectionately called him, and Megawati Sukarnoputri. 
Gus Dur is the leader of the Nahdlatul Ulama, a traditional rural-based 
Indonesia : From Foe co Friend 287 
Muslim organization with 30 million members. His PKB (National 
Awakening Party) had won 12.6 percent of the votes in the June election. 
Megawati , daughter of President Sukarno, led the PDI-P (Indonesian 
Democratic Party-Struggle) at tumultuous mass rallies to win the largest 
single block of 34 percent of the votes, beating Habibie (Golkar) by a 
wide margin. However, in the People's Consultative Assembly of 695 (of 
whom 200 were not elected by the electorate), at 4:00 P.M. on 20 October, 
Gus Dur was declared the president, winning by 373 against Megawati's 
313 votes. Frenetic political maneuvring began and ended only at 3:00 
P.M. the following day when the assembly started to vote for the vice 
president. Three candidates, Akbar Tanjung of Golkar, Wiranto, chief of 
the Indonesian armed forces, the TNI (Tentara Nasional Indonesia), and 
Hamzah Haz of the Islamic coalition had entered the contest. Megawati 
was reluctant to stand, fearing another humiliation. Gus Dur spent much 
time to persuade her and finally assured her of the support of enough par­
ties to win. He needed her as vice president to establish his legitimacy as 
president. Meanwhile, violence and arson had broken out in several cities 
in Java and Bali where she had won nearly all the votes. 
Fortuitously, Stanley Roth was in Singapore at that time to address a 
meeting of the World Economic Forum. He met Prime Minister Goh and 
me at 8:00 P.M., hours after Gus Dur had been elected president. We were 
as convinced as he was that Indonesia could not avoid bloodshed and more 
turmoil if Megawati was cheated of the vice presidency by political chi­
canery in the People's Consultative Assembly . Both sides resolved to do 
what we could to let the key Indonesian players know the effect on inter­
national investor confidence if this should happen. 
On 22 October, the Jakarta Post reported that the U.S. secretary of 
state, Madeleine Albright (then in Africa), had phoned Gus Dur early the 
day before to "convey Washington's view" that Megawati should be 
elected vice-president. Megawati won convincingly by over 396 votes to 
284. That saved Indonesia from a second round of disorder. 
The end result was the best in the circumstances. Gus Dur, the new 
president, had lost his eyesight. He had suffered two strokes in 1998, but 
was sufficiently alert and nimble on 20 October to move swiftly to maxi­
mize his chances. After Habibie's accountability speech had been rejected 
by the People's Consultative Assembly , Gus Dur garnered most of the 
288 From Third World to First 
pro-Muslim votes that would have gone to Habibie. Within a week of his 
election, he quickly appointed a cabinet for national reconciliation in 
which all major political parties and the armed forces were represented. It 
may not be the most efficient government because of the wide power 
sharing, but it may help to heal the wounds self-inflicted in 17 months of 
bloody clashes: pribumi against Chinese, Muslims against Christians, 
Dayaks and Malays against Madurese, Acehnese separatists against the 
Indonesian military. Gus Dur and Megawati have two daunting tasks: to 
repair the social fabric of Indonesian society and restart the economy. 
During the Suharto era, to avoid misunderstanding with the presi­
dent or his aides, we did not meet Indonesian opposition leaders. Unlike 
the Americans and West Europeans, we did not cultivate Suharto's oppo­
nents-Megawati Sukarnoputri, Amien Rais, or even Gus Dur. Our close 
ties were with Suharto's ministers and the TNI. They, especially Ali 
Alatas, the foreign minister, and General Wiranto, the defense minister 
and TNI commander, helped to stabilize bilateral relations during 
Habibie's presidency. However, between January and April 1999, S. R. 
Nathan, then director of the Institute of Defence and Strategic Studies 
(IDSS), later, from September 1999, our president, invited Indonesian 
political party leaders to address his institute, with full local and interna­
tional media coverage. During their visits, Singapore ministers met the 
speakers at lunches and dinners to understand their position and establish 
rapport. In this way, we got to know Gus Dur (later president), Megawati 
Sukarnoputri (later vice president), Amien Rais (later chairman of the 
People's Consultative Assembly), and Marzuki Darusman of Golkar (later 
attorney general in Gus Dur's cabinet). 
This had angered Habibie and his aides who publicly expressed dis­
pleasure at our interfering in their internal affairs. IDSS pointed out that 
it had invited Golkar representatives to speak; Marzuki Darusman had 
done so, and IDSS had repeatedly invited Golkar's chairman, Akbar 
Tanjung, who had not been able to come. This did not placate Dr. Dewi 
Fortuna Anwar, Habibie's foreign policy adviser. She accused Singapore of 
being pro-Megawati. 
I had met Gus Dur in Jakarta in 1997 when he addressed a private 
meeting where he explained the role of Islam in Indonesia and assured 
investors that it was not of the Middle East variety. He was a good 
Indo nesia: From Foe co Friend 289 
speaker, fluent in English, well-read in Arabic, and highly intelligent. It 
did not occur to me then that he would become president and inherit 
Suharto's Indonesia after a Habibie interregnum. 
The night he was sworn in as president, both Prime Minister Goh and 
I sent him our congratulations . We did not want any doubts about our 
support for their new president. 
Soon after his election, he summoned all Asean ambassadors to inform 
them that he would visit all the Asean states beginning with Singapore. 
Addressing our ambassador, Edward Lee, he said pointedly, "Indonesia 
wants good relations with Singapore and hopes Singapore will support its 
recovery." He went on to explain his vision of the future: China, India, 
and Indonesia , three of the world's most populous countries, would come 
together; Japan and Singapore would provide financial and technological 
support. Then Asia would be less dependent on the West. 
Before he came to Singapore, his foreign minister, Dr. Alwi Shihab, 
an able and practical man who had been a businessman and also a visiting 
professor of divinity at an American college, called on Edward Lee at the 
Singapore embassy to demonstrate that Indonesia was not taking a big 
brother attitude but wanted sincere cooperation. Edward Lee assured him 
that Singapore would help, but that there were limits to the financial and 
technological capabilities of 3 million Singaporeans. Singapore did not 
have the resources of America or Japan to restart the Indonesian economy. 
Alwi Shihab told him that we could act as a catalyst to bring back confi­
dence to Indonesia. Hence, my first meeting with Gus Dur as president of 
Indonesia was warm and constructive. 
Prime Minister Goh met President Gus Dur at the airport on 6 
November 1999, and had good discussions before and during lunch. 
Then, before a packed audience of 500 businesspeople and diplomats, Gus 
Dur gave an impressive display of his political grasp and the skills 
expected of the new president of Indonesia in an era of greater openness 
and accountability. When I called on him, he invited me to be a member 
of his international advisory council for Indonesia's economic recovery, an 
honor I could not refuse. He talked of ethical standards and clean govern­
ment. I said if he expected his ministers to be honest, they had to be paid 
so that they could live up to their status without corruption. His coordi­
nating minister for economy, finance, and industry, Kwik Kian Gie, who 
290 From Third World to First 
was present, told George Yeo, our minister-in-attendance, that he had 
just discussed this sensitive issue with his president, sensitive because 
they could afford this only for top people, not across the board. 
We had an empat mata meeting for an unrestrained discussion. His 
vitality in spite of his age, two strokes, and a hectic morning was reassur­
ing. His sense of humor was never absent. His demeanor was that of a 
president in complete command of the situation. The Muslim parties that 
had elected him would become more realistic by having to deal with the 
problems and through interaction with him. They would not be the same 
after five years. He wanted the prime minister and me to receive his vice 
president, Megawati, and help her gain as much experience as possible. 
He said he had a good relationship with General Wiranto, and a clear 
view of how the military's role should gradually evolve. He knew that 
there were many incompatibles in the cabinet, especially in the finance 
and economics sectors. These problems would be sorted out. He was deter­
mined to make the government coherent and consistent. 
His sense of humor was matched by a realistic appreciation of self. 
He joked, "The first president of Indonesia [Sukarno} was crazy about 
women; the second president [Suharto} was crazy about money; the third 
president [Habibie} was just crazy." His daughter who accompanied him 
asked, "What about the fourth president ?" Without missing a beat, he 
said, "Wayang" (a performance, theater). In one word, he summed up his 
role in Indonesia. He was confident he could play the part of president of 
Indonesia in the new era of openness to the media and the NGOs (non­
government organizations) that wanted reformasi and democrasi. 
However, Indonesia has undergone a sea change. Power is no longer 
centralized in the hands of a president backed by an all-powerful ABRI, 
the armed forces. The election had thrown up a large number of small 
Islamic parties but together they did not form the majority. Megawati's 
party won 34 percent of the votes, the largest single bloc. Amien Rais, 
leader of a Muslim party with 7 percent of the votes, skillfully cobbled 
together a coalition of Muslim parties into a "Middle Axis" that made 
deals with other groups and won him the speakership of the People's 
Consultative Assembly against Megawati's candidate. The Middle Axis 
also blocked Megawati from the presidency by voting for Gus Dur, a tra­
ditional Muslim leader of central and east Java. Although a Muslim 
Indonesia: From Foe to Friend 291 
cleric, Gus Dur is acceptable to the nationalists because he has always 
stood for the separation of religion (including Islam) from the state. 
However, he was elected president only because of the votes of Muslims in 
the Middle Axis. Suharto had kept Islam in check until the late 1980s 
when he started to cultivate the Muslims to counter ABRI's influence. 
Habibie, as president, actively nurtured and helped them mobilize sup­
port for his reelection. Having entered the corridors of power, political 
Islam is now a major force in Indonesia and will remain so. The challenge 
for Indonesia is how to maintain a balance that will enable its people of 
diverse races and religions to unite as one nation based on the credo of 
their founding father, President Sukarno, Bhinneka Tunggal Ika (unity in 
diversity), enshrined in their national crest. 
18. Building Ties with Thailand, 
the Philippines, and Brunei 
My early impressions of the Thais were gathered from stopovers in Bang­
kok on the way to and from London in the 1950s. Later, on visits accom­
panying the Tunku in 1962-1963, I was impressed by the quality of 
the men in charge of their foreign policy. The Thai foreign ministry 
recruited their brightest and best, educated in British, European, and 
Latin American universities. It was their glamor service, highly paid and 
much respected because of their foreign travels at a time when travel was 
rare. Their domestic administrators did not match the quality of their for­
eign service officers. They needed their best to fend off encroachments by 
the British from Burma and by the French from Indochina. Thailand is 
the only Southeast Asian country that has never been colonized. 
I met Prime Minister Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn in Bang­
kok in 1966. He was a staunch supporter of U.S. intervention in Vietnam, 
but by January 1973, he told me that he believed a total U.S. withdrawal 
from Indochina was inevitable in the long run. He wanted to see the 
region united by having the Indochinese countries-North and South 
Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia , and also Burma, brought into Asean, but 
only after a genuine ceasefire by North Vietnam. 
Thanom was not a complex man. He was loyal to his friends and 
allies. He treated me as his friend and we exchanged views frankly and 
freely. He was worried because of the support Thailand had given the 
Americans, including the use of huge air bases from which the U.S. Air 
Force had bombed North Vietnam-Vietnamese enmity and retribution 
294 From Third World to First 
were not to be lightly dismissed. He lamented the fact that the Americans 
were fighting with one hand tied behind their backs; they attacked North 
Vietnam only by air and fought a defensive war in South Vietnam, a no­
win strategy. All they could hope for was not to lose. The Thais were 
adjusting to new realities. 
In October that year, large demonstrations in Bangkok demanding a 
more democratic constitution led to Thanom's departure for the United 
States. He and his wife were thoroughly unhappy living in an apartment 
in Boston. They missed the warm tropics, their friends and relatives, and 
most of all their spicy Thai food. 
In December 1974, Thanom flew back to Bangkok without notice. 
The Thai government wanted to send him back to the United States, but 
he refused to leave unless his ailing father accompanied him to a destina­
tion closer than America. I agreed at the Thai government 's request to let 
Thanom take up residence in Singapore, but made it a condition that 
he refrain from political activities during his stay. I thought it a plus if 
Singapore could become a neutral sanctuary like Switzerland in Europe. 
When I had him, his wife, daughter, and son-in-law , who had been 
with him in Boston, to dinner, he recounted the woes of being an exile in 
the unaccustomed cold of New England, the sense of isolation, and neigh­
bors who complained of the pungent smells of Thai curries. In Singapore 
he received an endless stream of relatives and friends and our lifestyle was 
not too alien. But the Thai government (through the embassy staff and 
other officials in Singapore) kept a watchful eye for possible politicking 
by his Thai visitors and him. 
Thanom returned to Bangkok two years later in a monk's robe, pub­
licly declaring that he wanted to enter a monastery , and was welcomed by 
some members of the Thai royal family. Time had moved on, and Thanom 
never returned to power, but he did persuade the Thai government to 
return a good part of his assets which had been frozen or confiscated. This 
was the Thai way, never a brutal, total confrontation if a compromise was 
possible. Forgiving is an essential part of Buddhism. 
A general election had been held earlier, in 1975, when Kukrit 
Pramoj, a traditional monarchist, became prime minister. He headed a 
coalition in which his Social Action Party had only 18 of the 140 seats. 
Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 295 
Thailand needed him to deal with the impending North Vietnamese vic­
tory over the South. I found him shrewd and philosophical, with a keen if 
mischievous and malicious sense of humor. But he could be frivolous. 
Articulate , with expressive hands and face, he did not strike me as a man 
with a serious political purpose. He had acted as the prime minister in the 
Hollywood production The Quiet American. A divorce, he lived well in a 
large, attractive, old-style Thai teakwood house in central Bangkok, where 
he entertained me to dinner alfresco. 
As a formulator of policy, Kukrit worried me. I visited him in 
Bangkok on 17 April 1975, a week after the Khmer Rouge captured 
Phnom Penh and two weeks before Saigon fell. He did not have much to 
say about Thailand's position. Our ambassador, who had been brought up 
in Thailand and knew their leaders and their culture, thought they were 
still groping for a new foreign policy. I could not have visited them at a 
more tense moment. Kukrit said the U.S. bases should go within a year. 
He was no longer sure of the United States, and their presence, being 
more of a "target" than a "deterrent ," compromised and embarrassed 
Thailand. I said we should not write off the United States. The U.S. 
Congress would change its attitude as developments overtook them. 
Singapore's view was that the presence of the U.S. Seventh Fleet made our 
relations with China and the Soviet Union easier. Without it, the Russian 
influence would be overpowering. When the Soviets wanted Singapore to 
allow them to store oil for their fishing fleet on one of our outer islands, 
we had told them to buy from the American oil companies in Singapore. 
If there were no Seventh Fleet, we would not be able to give them such a 
reply. 
Two weeks after Kukrit visited Beijing in early July, he came to 
Singapore. He had received a North Vietnamese delegation in Bangkok. 
He said that the "domino theory" had been realized in French Indochina, 
and that the North Vietnamese wanted to be the ruler of all Indochina. I 
asked why Radio Hanoi was so hostile toward Thailand when their gov­
ernment was extending the hand of friendship. Their tactics, Kukrit said, 
were to coerce and frighten the Thais into establishing diplomatic rela­
tions, and they wanted the world to see that Thailand was frightened. He 
described his meeting with the leader of the North Vietnamese delegation 
296 From Third World to First 
to Bangkok: He did not appear to be arrogant, said they should let 
"bygones be bygones, " and embraced him warmly when they met. Kukrit 
said he "shivered in the embrace. " They were cold in their smiles and 
there was a distinct drop in temperature when the five of them sat in a 
room. The leader was relaxed but the rest merely sat stiffly. They pressed 
their claim for the return of South Vietnamese aircraft that had been 
flown from Vietnam to Thailand in the days before the fall of Saigon. 
Kukrit's view was that we (Asean) had to be strong and firm and play 
"big brother to the Indochinese countries." We could help them, every 
now and then, in ways that would be sufficient to keep them just beyond 
the point of starvation. We had to show our affluence, strength, and soli­
darity, and occasionally ask them to join in song and dance festivals. His 
view on the North Vietnamese had become more robust after meeting 
them in Bangkok, but, more important, after his visit to China. The 
Thais were quick and nimble when it came to protecting their sover­
eignty. 
He related to me what Zhou Enlai told him about me: "I am sur­
prised at him [referring to me}. He is of my own blood. Why is he afraid 
of China taking over Singapore? His greater problem is to prevent the 
Chinese from returning to Singapore." I asked Kukrit to tell Zhou that I 
had no worry about the Chinese returning to Singapore, or about the 
Chinese in Singapore wanting to return to China, or about China taking 
over Singapore. Singapore was too small for China and the problems it 
would create would not make it worthwhile. My concern was over the 
messages of congratulations China sent to the Malayan Communist Party 
and the Indonesian Communist Party on their anniversaries. These 
aroused great antipathy and animosity in Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta, and 
I did not want that animosity reflected toward me just because I had the 
same blood as Zhou Enlai. I asked rhetorically whether China could help 
Singapore if it clashed with Indonesia. Kukrit, in a mischievous moment, 
disclosed this to the Bangkok press. 
Our relations with the Thais became closer after the Vietnamese 
attacked Cambodia in December 1978. General Kriangsak, the Thai 
prime minister then, had no experience in foreign affairs. His foreign 
minister, Dr. Upadit Pachariyangkun, was an able man, highly intelligent 
Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 297 
and German-educa ted, but his experience did not extend to dealing with 
invading Vietnamese. It was a critical moment for them when the Viet­
namese offered not to come within 20 kilometers (about 12 miles) of the 
Thai border if Thailand would stay neutral and not condemn Vietnam's 
attack against Cambodia. I sent Kriangsak a letter through Rajaratnam, 
my foreign minister, urging him not to agree. If he did, and the Viet­
namese subsequently breached their undertaking, he would have no 
standing internationally to attack Vietnam. It was better to warn the 
international community of the threat the Vietnamese posed to the rest of 
Southeast Asia now. I believe the Chinese must have assured him that 
they would stand by him if Thailand was attacked because Kriangsak 
took a stand, protested against the invasion, and gave sanctuary to the 
retreating Cambodian forces and tens of thousands of refugees. 
Kriangsak was not as sharp-witted as Kukrit. He got into power 
because he was commander in chief of the Thai army. He was prone to 
worrying, especially over the fallout from the conflict in Cambodia. He 
had placed all his bets on the Chinese. When Deng Xiaoping visited 
Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, and Singapore in November 1978, before the 
Vietnamese attacked Cambodia, Kriangsak's welcome was the warmest. 
As I told Deng in the car going to the airport after our talks in Singapore, 
Kriangsak had taken a stand and put himself way out in front, banking on 
China. If China allowed the Vietnamese a free hand in Cambodia, 
Kriangsak and Thailand would be in peril. Deng looked grim when I 
described the consequences that would follow if Thailand switched sides 
believing that the Soviet Union was going to prevail in Southeast Asia. 
Kriangsak's successor was General Prem Tinsulanonda. A bachelor, he 
was exceptionally honest and led a government largely free from corrup­
tion. During the eight years he was prime minister (1980-1988), Thai­
land prospered and economic development took off, in spite of the war in 
Cambodia. He was a steady and reliable leader who held to a consistent 
policy, a man of few words, no scholar, but practical. He enjoyed the 
king's trust. His command of English was not as good as Kukrit's, but he 
had the better strategic sense. His neat dress and manners reflected his 
self-discipline and an abstemious, almost austere lifestyle. The personal 
chemistr y between us was good. From time to time, he would look closely 
298 From Third World to First 
and seriously at me to say, "I agree with you. You are a good friend of 
Thailand. " 
His foreign minister, Siddhi Savetsila, was an air marshal with a mas­
ter's degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. (Their air 
force leaders were usually very well educated.) But Siddhi had more than 
brains. Able and firm, he had a strong character and constancy of pur­
pose. He was of mixed Thai and European descent, fair-complexioned, 
with Eurasian features, but was accepted by the Thais as a loyal Thai. He 
knew the Vietnamese were wily, and he saw through every maneuvre 
they made. Without Prem as prime minister and Siddhi as foreign min­
ister, we would not have been able to cooperate so closely and success­
fully to tie the Vietnamese down in Cambodia. The two were a good 
team that secured Thailand's long-term security and economic develop­
ment. Without them, the Vietnamese could have succeeded in manipu­
lating the Thai government. 
When General Chatichai Choonhavan became prime minister m 
August 1988, he talked of turning Indochina from a battlefield into a mar­
ketplace. Siddhi remained as Chatichai's foreign minister, but his position 
soon became untenable. Chatichai kept contradicting him publicly until 
Siddhi resigned. Because of Chatichai's eagerness to get Thai businesspeo­
ple into Vietnam's reconstruction, the Vietnamese hung on in Cambodia 
and dragged out the Paris peace talks for another three years, to 1991. 
Chatichai, when he was foreign minister in Kukrit's government, 
once told me that when he visited his constituency in the rural northeast, 
he would drive up in a powerful, expensive Porsche. Asked why, he 
replied that if he went in an ordinary car, the farmers would not believe 
that he could help them. In a Porsche, they knew that he was a wealthy 
man with the means to help them. He did not explain what I had learned 
from newspaper reports, that often the headman was paid to ensure that 
he delivered the votes of his villagers. 
Chatichai was an engaging character. After some involvement in a 
coup in the 1960s, he had been sent to Argentina and later Switzerland, 
where he owned a villa. He spent years in Europe travelling in fast cars 
and enjoying life. When he was prime minister, his government was 
reputed to be the most corrupt in Thai history. Bribery was accepted in 
Thailand as the natural order of things. Only in the mid-1990s, with a 
Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 299 
growing educated middle class, was there disquiet at the rampant corrup­
tion. Vast sums of money were needed to get elected. Party leaders had to 
finance their supporting candidates, but after elections the leaders and 
MPs had to recover their expenses. This was money politics the Thai way. 
In Japan, construction contracts paid for election expenses. In Thailand, 
every contract must have its payoff, otherwise there would be no funds for 
the next election. 
On my next visit, in January 1998, in discussions, Prime Minister 
Chuan Leekpai, his deputy prime minister, and finance minister showed 
their understanding of the need to work with the IMF to restore confi­
dence in Thailand. By 1999, they had improved Thailand's standing with 
the IMF and international investors. 
The Philippines was a world apart from us, running a different style of 
politics and government under an American military umbrella. It was not 
until January 1974 that I visited President Marcos in Manila. When my 
Singapore Airlines plane flew into Philippine airspace, a small squadron 
of Philippine Air Force jet fighters escorted it to Manila Airport. There 
Marcos received me in great style-the Filipino way. I was put up at the 
guest wing of Malacafiang Palace in lavishly furnished rooms, valuable 
objects of art bought in Europe strewn all over. Our hosts were gracious, 
extravagant in hospitality, flamboyant. Over a thousand miles of water 
separated us. There was no friction and little trade. We played golf, talked 
about the future of Asean, and promised to keep in touch. 
His foreign minister, Carlos Romulo, was a small man of about five 
feet some 20 years my senior, with a ready wit and a self-deprecating 
manner about his size and other limitations. Romulo had a good sense of 
humor, an eloquent tongue, and a sharp pen, and was an excellent dinner 
companion because he was a wonderful raconteur, with a vast repertoire of 
anecdotes and witticisms. He did not hide his great admiration for the 
Americans. One of his favorite stories was about his return to the Philip­
pines with General MacArthur. As MacArthur waded ashore at Leyte, the 
water reached his knees but came up to Romulo's chest and he had to 
swim ashore. His good standing with Asean leaders and with Ameri­
cans increased the prestige of the Marcos administration. Marcos had in 
300 From Third World to First 
Romulo a man of honor and integrity who helped give a gloss of respect­
ability to his regime as it fell into disrepute in the 1980s. 
In Bali in 197 6, at the first Asean summit held after the fall of 
Saigon, I found Marcos keen to push for greater economic cooperation in 
Asean. But we could not go faster than the others. To set the pace, Marcos 
and I agreed to implement a bilateral Philippines-Singapore across-the­
board 10 percent reduction of existing tariffs on all products and to pro­
mote intra-Asean trade. We also agreed to lay a Philippines-Singapore 
submarine cable. I was to discover that for him, the communique was the 
accomplishment itself; its implementation was secondary, an extra to be 
discussed at another conference. 
We met every two to three years. He once took me on a tour of his 
library at Malacafiang, its shelves filled with bound volumes of newspa­
pers reporting his activities over the years since he first stood for elections. 
There were encyclopedia-size volumes on the history and culture of the 
Philippines with his name as the author. His campaign medals as an anti­
Japanese guerrilla leader were displayed in glass cupboards. He was the 
undisputed boss of all Filipinos. Imelda, his wife, had a penchant for lux­
ury and opulence. When they visited Singapore before the Bali summit 
they came in style in two DC8s, his and hers. 
Marcos did not consider China a threat for the immediate future, 
unlike Japan. He did not rule out the possibility of an aggressive Japan, if 
circumstances changed. He had memories of the horrors the Imperial 
Army had inflicted on Manila. We had strongly divergent views on the 
Vietnamese invasion and occupation of Cambodia. While he, pro forma, 
condemned the Vietnamese occupation, he did not consider it a danger to 
the Philippines. There was the South China Sea separating them and the 
American navy guaranteed their security. As a result, Marcos was not 
active on the Cambodian question. Moreover, he was to become preoccu­
pied with the deteriorating security in his country. 
Marcos, ruling under martial law, had detained opposition leader 
Benigno (Ninoy) Aquino, reputed to be as charismatic and powerful a 
campaigner as he was. He freed Aquino and allowed him to go to the 
United States. As the economic situation in the Philippines deteriorated, 
Aquino announced his decision to ren1rn. Mrs. Marcos issued several 
Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 301 
veiled warnings. When the plane arrived at Manila Airport from Taipei in 
August 1983, he was shot as he descended from the aircraft. A whole 
posse of foreign correspondents with television camera crews accompany­
ing him on the aircraft was not enough protection. 
International outrage over the killing resulted in foreign banks stop­
ping all loans to the Philippines, which owed over US$25 billion and 
could not pay the interest due. This brought Marcos to the crunch. He 
sent his minister for trade and industry, Bobby Ongpin, to ask me for a 
loan of US$300-500 million to meet the interest payments. I looked him 
straight in the eye and said, "We will never see that money back." More­
over, I added, everyone knew that Marcos was seriously ill and under con­
stant medication for a wasting disease. What was needed was a strong, 
healthy leader, not more loans. 
Shortly afterward, in February 1984, Marcos met me in Brunei at the 
sultanate's independence celebrations. He had undergone a dramatic 
physical change. Although less puffy than he had appeared on television, 
his complexion was dark as if he had been out in the sun. He was breath­
ing hard as he spoke, his voice was soft, eyes bleary, and hair thinning. He 
looked most unhealthy. An ambulance with all the necessary equipment 
and a team of Filipino doctors were on standby outside his guest bunga­
low. Marcos spent much of the time giving me a most improbable story of 
how Aquino had been shot. 
As soon as all our aides left, I went straight to the point, that no bank 
was going to lend him any money. They wanted to know who was going 
to succeed him if anything were to happen to him; all the bankers could 
see that he no longer looked healthy. Singapore banks had lent US$8 bil­
lion of the US$25 billion owing. The hard fact was they were not likely to 
get repayment for some 20 years. He countered that it would be only 
eight years. I said the bankers wanted to see a strong leader in the Philip­
pines who could restore stability, and the Americans hoped the election in 
May would throw up someone who could be such a leader. I asked whom 
he would nominate for the election. He said Prime Minister Cesar Virata. 
I was blunt. Virata was a nonstarter, a first-class administrator but no 
political leader; further, his most politically astute colleague, defense 
minister Juan Enrile, was out of favor. Marcos was silent, then he admit-
302 From Third World to First 
ted that succession was the nub of the problem. If he could find a succes­
sor, there would be a solution. As I left, he said, "You are a true friend." I 
did not understand him. It was a strange meeting. 
With medical care, Marcos dragged on. Cesar Virata met me in 
Singapore in January the following year. He was completely guileless, a 
political innocent. He said that Mrs. Imelda Marcos was likely to be nom­
inated as the presidential candidate. I asked how that could be when there 
were other weighty candidates, including Juan Enrile and Blas Ople, the 
labor minister. Virata replied it had to do with "flow of money"; she 
would have more money than other candidates to pay for the votes needed 
for nomination by the party and to win the election. He added that if she 
were the candidate, the opposition would put up Mrs. Cory Aquino and 
work up the people's feelings. He said the economy was going down with 
no political stability. 
The denouement came in February 1986 when Marcos held presiden­
tial elections which he claimed he won. Cory Aquino, the opposition can­
didate, disputed this and launched a civil disobedience campaign. 
Defense Minister Juan Enrile defected and admitted election fraud had 
taken place, and the head of the Philippine constabulary, Lieutenant 
General Fidel Ramos, joined him. A massive show of "people power" in 
the streets of Manila led to a spectacular overthrow of a dictatorship. The 
final indignity was on 25 February 1986, when Marcos and his wife fled 
in U.S. Air Force helicopters from Malacafiang Palace to Clark Air Base 
and were flown to Hawaii. This Hollywood-style melodrama could only 
have happened in the Philippines. 
Mrs. Aquino was sworn in as president amid jubilation. I had hopes 
that this honest, god-fearing woman would help regain confidence for the 
Philippines and get the country back on track. I visited her that June, 
three months after the event. She was a sincere, devout Catholic who 
wanted to do her best for her country by carrying out what she believed 
her husband would have done had he been alive, namely, restore democ­
racy to the Philippines. Democracy would then solve their economic and 
social problems. At dinner, Mrs. Aquino seated the chairman of the con­
stitutional commission, ChiefJustice Cecilia Munoz-Palma, next to me. I 
asked the learned lady what lessons her commission had learned from the 
experience of the last 40 years since independence in 1946 would guide 
Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 303 
her in drafting the constitution. She answered without hesitation, "We 
will not have any reservations or limitations on our democracy . We must 
make sure that no dictator can ever emerge to subvert the constitution. " 
Was there no incompatibility of the American-type separation of powers 
with the culture and habits of the Filipino people that had caused prob­
lems for the presidents before Marcos? Apparently none. 
Endless attempted coups added to Mrs. Aquino's problems. The army 
and the constabulary had been politicized. Before the Asean summit in 
December 1987, a coup was threatened. Without President Suharto's firm 
support, the summit would have been postponed and confidence in 
Aquino's government undermined. The Philippine government agreed 
that the responsibility for security should be shared between them and 
the other Asean governments, in particular the Indonesian government. 
General Benny Moerdani, President Suharto's trusted aide, took charge. 
He positioned an Indonesian warship in the middle of Manila Bay with 
helicopters and a commando team ready to rescue the Asean heads of gov­
ernment if there should be a coup attempt during the summit. I was 
included in their rescue plans. I wondered if such a rescue could work but 
decided to go along with the arrangements, hoping that the show of force 
would scare off the coup leaders. We were all confined to the Philippine 
Plaza Hotel by the seafront facing Manila Bay where we could see the 
Indonesian warship at anchor. The hotel was completely sealed off and 
guarded. The summit went off without any mishap. We all hoped that 
this show of united support for Mrs. Aquino's government at a time when 
there were many attempts to destabilize it would calm the situation. 
It made no difference. There were more coup attempts, discouraging 
investments badly needed to create jobs. This was a pity because they had 
so many able people, educated in the Philippines and the United States. 
Their workers were English-speaking, at least in Manila. There was no 
reason why the Philippines should not have been one of the more success­
ful of the Asean countries. In the 1950s and 1960s, it was the most devel­
oped, because America had been generous in rehabilitating the country 
after the war. Something was missing, a gel to hold society together. The 
people at the top, the elite mestizos, had the same detached attitude to 
the native peasants as the mestizos in their haciendas in Latin America 
had toward their peons. They were two different societies: Those at the 
304 From Third World to First 
top lived a life of extreme luxury and comfort while the peasants scraped a 
living, and in the Philippines it was a hard living. They had no land but 
worked on sugar and coconut plantations. They had many children 
because the church discouraged birth control. The result was increasing 
poverty. 
It was obvious that the Philippines would never take off unless there 
was substantial aid from the United States. George Shultz, the secretary of 
state, was sympathetic and wanted to help but made clear to me that the 
United States would be better able to do something if Asean showed sup­
port by making its contribution. The United States was reluctant to go it 
alone and adopt the Philippines as its special problem. Shultz wanted 
Asean to play a more prominent role to make it easier for the president to 
get the necessary votes in Congress. I persuaded Shultz to get the aid 
project off the ground in 1988, before President Reagan's second term 
of office ended. He did. There were two meetings for a Multilateral 
Assistance Initiative (Philippines Assistance Programm e): The first in 
Tokyo in 1989 brought US$3.5 billion in pledges, and the second in 
Hong Kong in 1991, under the Bush administration, yielded US$14 bil­
lion in pledges. But instability in the Philippines did not abate. This 
made donors hesitant and delayed the implementation of projects. 
Mrs. Aquino's successor, Fidel Ramos, whom she had backed, was 
more practical and established greater stability. In November 1992, I vis­
ited him. In a speech to the 18th Philippine Business Conference, I said, "I 
do not believe democracy necessarily leads to development. I believe what 
a country needs to develop is discipline more than democracy ." In private, 
President Ramos said he agreed with me that British parliamentary-type 
constitutions worked better because the majority party in the legislature 
was also the government. Publicly, Ramos had to differ. 
He knew well the difficulties of trying to govern with strict American­
style separation of powers. The senate had already defeated Mrs. Aquino's 
proposal to retain the American bases. The Philippines had a rambunctious 
press but it did not check corruption. Individual press reporters could be 
bought, as could many judges. Something had gone seriously wrong. 
Millions of Filipino men and women had to leave their country for jobs 
abroad beneath their level of education. Filipino professionals whom we 
recruited to work in Singapore are as good as our own. Indeed, their archi-
Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 305 
tects, artists, and musicians are more artistic and creative than ours. 
Hundreds of thousands of them have left for Hawaii and for the American 
mainland. It is a problem the solution to which has not been made easier by 
the workings of a Philippine version of the American constitution. 
The difference lies in the culture of the Filipino people. It is a soft, 
forgiving culture. Only in the Philippines could a leader like Ferdinand 
Marcos, who pillaged his country for over 20 years, still be considered for 
a national burial. Insignificant amounts of the loot have been recovered, 
yet his wife and children were allowed to return and engage in politics. 
They supported the winning presidential and congressional candidates 
with their considerable resources and reappeared in the political and 
social limelight after the 1998 election that returned President Joseph 
Estrada. General Fabian Ver, Marcos's commander-in-chief who had been 
in charge of security when Aquino was assassinated, had fled the Philip­
pines together with Marcos in 1986. When he died in Bangkok, the 
Estrada government gave the general military honors at his burial. One 
Filipino newspaper, Today, wrote on 22 November 1998, "Ver, Marcos 
and the rest of the official family plunged the country into two decades 
of lies, torture and plunder. Over the next decade, Marcos's cronies and 
immediate family would tiptoe back into the country, one by one­
always to the public's revulsion and disgust, though they showed that 
there was nothing that hidden money and thick hides could not with­
stand." Some Filipinos write and speak with passion. If they could get 
their elite to share their sentiments and act, what could they not have 
achieved? 
Brunei was a placid, peaceful sultanate, wealthy with oil in the mid-
1950s when I was practicing law and appeared in their courts. 
The sultan, Sir Omar Ali Saifuddien, invited me as prime minister, 
together with our head of state, Yusof Ishak, to his birthday celebrations 
in August 1960. He was a quiet man, soft-spoken, with a friendly, attrac­
tive smile. He had few friends, for nearly all invariably wanted to touch 
him for money. I met him several times in London when I was negotiat­
ing terms for Malaysia in 1962 and 1963. He was never comfortable at 
the prospect of becoming a member state of Malaysia. Most of his oil rev-
306 From Third World to First 
enue would go to the federal government, and he was not confident that 
the special attention the Tunku was lavishing on him would last once he 
was in Malaysia: He would become just one of Malaysia's many sultans. I 
gave him my reasons why Singapore wanted to join, but left him to make 
his own decision. He had legal advisers, but he made the political deci­
sion to stay out. In retrospect, it was a sound decision. The British stayed 
on from 1963 until February 1984 when they gave Brunei independence. 
On one of his visits to Singapore after we separated from Malaysia, Sir 
Omar smiled broadly at me with his moustache twitching and his eyes 
twinkling, to say, "You are now like Brunei. It is better for you." Indeed, 
we shared certain common interests: small countries surrounded by big­
ger neighbors. I did not covet his wealth, never borrowed money from 
him. I gave advice only when he asked for it. He trusted me. 
In 1967, after Malaysia wound up the common currency board, its 
members, Malaysia, Brunei, and Singapore, agreed that our new curren­
cies would be interchangeable at par. When this arrangement was discon­
tinued in 1973, the old sultan decided to retain the arrangements with 
the Singapore currency, interchangeability at par. He was a most frugal 
sultan, completely different from other sultans in the region. He gave 
Brunei a sense of financial discipline and began the accumulation of huge 
assets that were managed by crown agents in London. 
When the British government pressed him to institute constitutional 
reforms for democracy , to delay and buy time he abdicated in 1967 in 
favor of his eldest son, Hassanal Bolkiah, then a young man training at 
Sandhurst. He spent a lot of time thinking of ways to keep the British in 
Brunei as his protector. He refused to have anything to do with Indonesia 
or Malaysia. He distrusted the Indonesians for supporting Azahari, the 
leader of the Brunei People's Party who led a revolt in December 1962. 
He was wary of Malaysians because Malaysian officers seconded to work in 
Brunei in the late 1950s and early 1960s had patronized his Bruneian 
officers, treating them like country cousins. I was careful not to have any 
Singapore officer seconded for any length of time to Brunei, and when any 
was sent, made sure he was properly briefed to treat the Bruneians prop­
erly and courteously. 
At a private meeting in March 1979, I urged Sir Omar, the former 
sultan, or Seri Begawan as he was called after he abdicated, to get half a 
Building Ties with Thailand, the Philippines, and Brunei 307 
foot into Asean before Brunei's independence in 1984. I said President 
Suharto of Indonesia and Prime Minister Hussein Onn of Malaysia were 
both friendly and well disposed toward Brunei. He agreed to consider 
seeking observer status for Brunei in Asean, but nothing came of it. I 
explained to him how the world had changed. Sir Omar held on to his 
implicit faith in the British, that they would always be there to back him. 
He did not want to recognize Britain's changed circumstances, that there 
were no British naval or air task forces to come to Brunei's rescue. 
Visiting British ministers frequently raised Brunei with me after 
Margaret Thatcher became prime minister. Her government wanted to 
end the protectorate by persuading the sultan to hold elections, become a 
more contemporary monarchy , and be independent. I did my best to urge 
the Seri Begawan, Sir Omar, and the sultan to move forward but they 
were not persuaded. The British government finally concluded that 
regardless of whether or not Brunei had representative government, it 
would have to take responsibility for its own future. Britain would con­
tinue to give support against external threat by maintaining a Gurkha 
battalion for which Brunei would pay. I also urged Lord Carrington in 
1979, soon after he became foreign secretary, to be firm with British offi­
cers who wanted to extend their stay in Brunei. They were preventing 
Bruneian officials, almost all of whom had been educated in Britain, from 
getting the experience they needed to run their own country. There was a 
significant change of policy after that conversation. By 1984, when Bru­
nei became independent, nearly all senior positions were held by indig­
enous Bruneians. 
In 1980, I had raised with President Suharto the question of Brunei's 
possible membership of Asean when it became independent. Suharto said 
he would welcome Brunei if it wanted to join. I then persuaded the sultan 
to look beyond his father's view that Asean was unimportant; he should 
visit President Suharto and the other leaders of Asean. He finally did so in 
April 1981. Suharto received him warmly in Jakarta. The sultan then vis­
ited Malaysia and Thailand. When Brunei joined in 1984, Asean mem­
bership gave it an umbrella of sorts for its security and made it easier for 
the sultan to get along with his neighbors. 
Brunei has enjoyed peace and stability since independence. The sultan 
has grown in self-confidence. Prince Mohamed has become a knowledge-
308 From Third World to First 
able foreign minister and senior Bruneian officers have gained wide expo­
sure at international conferences and grown in their jobs. The Seri 
Begawan, who died in 1986, would have been pleased with the results. 
The friendship between the sultan's father and me has continued 
between the present sultan, his brothers, and ministers and Prime 
Minister Goh and his colleagues. It is a relationship of trust and utmost 
good faith. 
19. Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambod ia: 
Coming to Terms with the Modern World 
On 29 October 1977, a Vietnamese DC3, an old Dakota, was hi jacked 
while on an internal flight and made to fly to Singapore. We could not 
stop it from landing at Seletar Air Base. We allowed the Vietnamese to 
send a new crew to fly the plane back with the old crew and the other pas­
sengers, after we had refuelled and refurbished it. We prosecuted the 
hijackers who were convicted and sentenced to 14 years' jail. 
Vietnam never paid for the supplies but instead sent us a stream of 
warnings to return the hijackers or face the consequences. We had to 
stand firm and not allow ourselves to be intimidated or there would be no 
end of problems. Singapore's relations with Vietnam, which was reunified 
in 1975, had started with a standoff. 
The Vietnamese cunningly exploited the fears and desires of the coun­
tries of Asean that wanted to befriend them. They talked tough over their 
radio and newspapers. I found their leaders insufferable. They were filled 
with their own importance, and prided themselves as the Prussians of 
Southeast Asia. True, they had suffered, taken all the punishment that 
American technology had inflicted on them, and through sheer endurance 
plus their skillful propaganda, exploiting the American media, defeated 
the Americans. They were confident they could beat any other power in 
the world, even China, if it interfered with Vietnam. For us, the puny 
states of Southeast Asia, they had nothing but contempt. They declared 
they would establish diplomatic relations with member states of Asean 
individually, and refused to deal with Asean as a group. Their newspapers 
310 From Third World to First 
criticized the existence of U.S. military bases in the Philippines and 
Thailand and spoke of collusive relations between China and Singapore. 
By 1976, deepening disagreements with China made them dispatch 
diplomatic missions to Asean. Their deputy foreign minister, Phan Hien, 
brought a message of peace when he visited the countries of the region. At 
first he excluded Singapore from his visits, but changed his plans and 
came in July 1976. He said Vietnam was noninterventionist in other 
countries' affairs. He drew a distinction between the people and the gov­
ernment of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The people of Vietnam 
supported the just cause of the peoples of Southeast Asia fighting for 
independence, meaning the communist insurgency . The government 
wanted to establish bilateral relations with these countries. I pointed out 
that this diplomatic sophistry could not erase questions in our minds that 
this dual track was interference. Referring to Soviet support for Vietnam, 
I said great powers knew it was dangerous to clash directly with each 
other so they used third countries to expand their influence. Differences 
between Asean countries were resolved within Asean so neither the 
United States nor the Soviet Union could exploit them. 
A year later Prime Minister Pham Van Dong also did not at first 
include Singapore in his proposed visits to the region, probably to make 
us feel insecure. We were unmoved; they could not as yet do us harm. He 
came on 16 October 1978. I found him arrogant and objectionable. The 
Vietnamese were excellent stage managers. Phan Hien had come first to 
show the sweet smiling face of communist Vietnam. Now Pham Van 
Dong, an old man of 72, showed that he was tough as nails. In discussions 
lasting two and a half hours, we dispensed with courtesies and euphe­
misms. Indeed, our forthright conversation had started in the car journey 
from the airport. 
I began by welcoming Vietnam's desire to work together with us for 
peace, stability, and prosperity, but listening to Radio Hanoi and read­
ing Nhan Dan, their newspaper, made me have reservations. They were 
unfriendly, even threatening. Dong declared Vietnam was a socialist coun­
try and he a communist. His doctrine was Marxism-Leninism. He had 
come to Singapore to speak as the prime minister of the Socialist Republic 
of Vietnam. Vietnam had to contribute to the cause of revolution and peace 
in Southeast Asia and the world. This should not be of concern to 
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 311 
Singapore. Vietnam was a country of 50 million people, a brave nation, 
intelligent and rich in natural resources. Both the United States and Japan 
had told the Vietnamese that their country would become economically a 
strong country, and that they, the United States and Japan, would need 
economic and trade relations with it. 
After this confident opening, in answer to my questions he claimed 
that Beijing had instigated 140,000 to 150,000 ethnic Chinese in the 
north to leave Vietnam and return to China across the border. They could 
not understand why. The root cause was China's policy toward Vietnam 
after Vietnam's victory over the Americans. China had continued its expan­
sionist policy against Vietnam. Beijing had made use of Khmer leaders to 
launch attacks into Vietnamese territory to commit atrocious crimes. 
China had caused the Hoa people to leave through a campaign launched 
by their embassy in Hanoi to train those who returned in order to send 
them back to Vietnam. The overseas Chinese had always been attached to 
their fatherland, feelings that were genuine and respectable. Beijing had 
exploited such sentiments. 
I asked whether China would have the same policy in Singapore if it 
had an embassy here. He did not think it would because it did not want 
to bring back all the overseas Chinese. It was better to leave them where 
they were, to use them as instruments. Looking at me pointedly, he said 
that ethnic Chinese everywhere would support China, just as ethnic 
Vietnamese abroad would support Vietnam. 
Then he turned to economic relations, with the astonishing news that 
Singapore could contribute to Vietnam's reconstruction. When I gently 
remonstrated that we must get some return for our goods and services, he 
bluntly said Vietnam's economy was not developed and the possibilities 
for trade were limited. That night, as I walked with him to dinner, he 
again said Vietnam could not trade but needed help; Singapore had bene­
fited from the Vietnam War, selling the Americans war material, hence it 
was our duty to help them. I was dumbfounded by this arrogant and bel­
ligerent attitude. 
As we drove along the waterfront the next day, he saw the many ships 
at anchor. Once again he charged that we had profited immeasurably from 
the Vietnam War and developed Singapore at their expense so it was our 
duty to help them. I was incredulous. I could not understand how we 
312 From Third World to First 
were under an obligation to help them because they had been impover­
ished by a war we had not caused and in which we had played no part. I 
said the main war materials we supplied to U.S. forces in Vietnam were 
POL (petrol, oil, and lubricants) from American and British oil compa­
nies. The profits to Singapore were negligible. He looked skeptical. I said 
we were prepared to trade but not to give aid. He was not pleased. We 
parted civil but cold. 
Twelve years later, in 1990, in Davos for a World Economic Forum 
meeting, Vo Van Kiet, the first vice chairman of the council of ministers 
of Vietnam, asked to see me. He hoped we would set aside outstanding 
differences and cooperate. I regretted that so much time had been lost in 
their occupation of Cambodia since December 1978. Until that conflict 
was resolved there could be no government-to-government ties. Kiet said 
there were great opportunities and he had granted over 100 investment 
licenses to foreign companies. I replied that whether there were 100 or 
1,000 licenses, Vietnam's economy could not take off until the United 
States signalled the World Bank to extend soft loans for its rehabilitation 
and the big U.S. banks decided that Vietnam was an acceptable risk. But 
once Vietnamese troops were out of Cambodia, we would resume where 
we had left off in 1978. 
In October 1991, Vietnam and all parties signed agreements in Paris 
for a comprehensive political settlement. A week later, Vo Van Kiet, now 
the prime minister, visited Singapore. Although I was no longer prime 
minister, we met when I attended a dinner for him given by my successor, 
Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. As the dinner was breaking up, he rose, 
walked up to me, held my arms in a semicommunist embrace, and asked 
whether I would help Vietnam. I asked, how? By becoming their eco­
nomic adviser. I was speechless. I had been the target of their virulent 
attacks since their occupation of Cambodia. Recovering from my surprise, 
I said that my experience had been confined to a city state, that I had no 
experience of a big country like Vietnam with a population of 60 million 
people, a country devastated by many years of war and working a commu­
nist system that had to be transformed into a market system. He persisted 
and followed up in two letters. 
After an exchange of letters, I agreed to visit them, not as an adviser, 
but to brainstorm ideas on their change to a free-market economy. It was 
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 313 
a totally different relationship when I went to Hanoi in April 1992. In an 
ornately decorated conference chamber, with Ho Chi Minh's bust as the 
centerpiece, I spent a whole day with Vo Van Kier and his team of minis­
ters and top officials. They had five questions, starting with what com­
modities Vietnam should focus on in its modernization, in what markets 
and with what partners. I replied that the questions themselves disclosed 
a mindset that came from long years of central planning, because they 
assumed there would be specific commodities, markets, or partners that 
could bring about a transformation for them. I suggested that they study 
the process through which Taiwan and South Korea had transformed 
themselves from agricultural into newly industrializing economies. A 
good strategy, I said, would be to use South Vietnam, especially Ho Chi 
Minh City (formerly Saigon), as the dynamo to get growth going for the 
whole country. Communism had prevailed in the north for 40 years, but 
for only 16 years in the south. People in the south were familiar with a 
free-market economy and could easily revert to working the old system. 
The best catalyst would be their emigres-Vietnamese refugees who had 
left after 1975 and done well in business in America, Western Europe, 
and Australasia. Invite them to return and kick-start the economy in the 
south, since they would want to help their families and friends. 
Kier seemed attracted to the suggestion. He himself was from the 
south, but other, more senior leaders wanted development to be spread 
equally, north and south. Unstated were their apprehensions that these 
emigres would return with subversive ideas or with links to foreign agen­
cies like the CIA. After decades of fighting a hide-and-seek guerrilla war, 
they were suspicious of everyone. 
Kier flew to Ho Chi Minh City from Hanoi for a final meeting with 
me. He asked me to return every year, saying I had been a real friend 
because I had given honest and sincere advice, although sometimes it was 
painful to hear. I promised to return within two years. In the meantime, I 
would send a task force to study their infrastructure shortcomings and 
make recommendations on their seaport, airport, roads, bridges, telecoms, 
and power supply. 
Our officers believed the Vietnamese wanted me to be associated with 
them to get closer to Asean and be more secure vis-a-vis China. Singapore 
had been Vietnam's most vocal opponent. If they normalized relations 
314 From Third World to First 
with us, foreign investors would have greater confidence. We decided to 
put the past behind us and help them as best we could to adjust to the 
market economy and become compatible partners in Asean. 
In Hanoi, I asked to call on Pham Van Dong. Although he had 
retired, he received me at their seat of government, a 1920s stone build­
ing which had been the office of the French governors. He met me at the 
main door at the top of a flight of stairs. Obviously infirm, he stood erect 
with great effort, then walked unsteadily to his chair some distance away. 
They had switched off the air-conditioning because he could not stand the 
cold. He was frail but spoke with great firmness and determination. He 
recalled our meeting in Singapore, and said the past was over; Vietnam 
was opening a new page. He thanked me for my friendship in coming to 
help them. He sounded bitter and chastened. I remembered the haughty 
and arrogant leader who came to Singapore in 1978. Seeing how tough he 
was in defeat, I was thankful that Deng Xiaoping had punished the 
Vietnamese. They would have been unbearable as the victorious Prussians 
of Southeast Asia. 
The Vietnamese leaders were an impressive group. Kiet was soft­
spoken, but his record as a communist underground fighter belied his 
gentle ways. They were formidable opponents who had great determina­
tion and fighting spirit. 
In my note to the cabinet I described Vietnam's terrible state, 
although it was six years after their opening up. In 1975, Ho Chi Minh 
City could vie with Bangkok; now (in 1992) it lagged more than 20 years 
behind. I felt that for the time being the people had lost confidence in 
their leaders, and the leaders had lost confidence in their system. 
However, they were an energetic and intelligent people, Confucianist at 
the grass roots. I believed they would bounce back in 20 to 30 years. 
Every meeting had started and ended punctually. Their leaders were seri­
ous men. 
Both Kiet and the ex-general secretary of the Communist Party, 
Nguyen Van Linh, whom I met in Ho Chi Minh City, separately said they 
had to reeducate their cadres on the market economy and free themselves 
from wrong Marxist thoughts. A foreign banker in Ho Chi Minh City 
told me that because of their grievous brain drain, they suffered from a 
dearth of trained talent. They regarded all foreigners as potential enemies 
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 315 
whose activities their Vietnamese employees had to report. He believed 
they wanted to prepare for the next war. 
They were still very communist in their ways. Kier was noncommit­
tal after the discussions we held in the morning and afternoon of the first 
day. Immediately after these two meetings, I was taken to meet the 
Communist Party general secretary, Do Muoi, who had been briefed on 
the contents of the two discussions in the 20 minutes that elapsed from 
my parting with the prime minister. Kier must have got the nod after my 
meeting with Do Muoi because that night, in his dinner speech, he 
picked up a point I had made, on which he had earlier been noncommit­
tal, that Vietnam should not have too many international airports and sea­
ports, but should concentrate on building one big international airport 
and one big international seaport so that they could be included in the 
world network of airports and seaports. 
We discussed their loss-incurring state-owned enterprises (SOEs). They 
wanted to privatize them or sell them off to the workers and others. I ex­
plained that this method would not provide them with what was critical­
efficient management. Singapore Airlines was 100 percent government­
owned, but it was efficient and profitable because it had to compete against 
international airlines. We did not subsidize it; if it was not profitable, it 
would have to close down. I recommended that they privatize their SOEs 
by bringing in foreign corporations to get an injection of management 
expertise and foreign capital for new technology. A change in the manage­
ment system was essential. They needed to work with foreigners to learn 
on the job. Privatizing within the country by selling to their own people 
could not bring about this result. 
An infrastructure task force we sent in September 1992 submitted a 
report which was adopted by the Vietnamese government. We set aside a 
US$ IO million Indochina Assistance Fund for technical training of their 
officials. 
Do Muoi visited Singapore in October 1993. He was astonished at the 
high quality of buildings and infrastructure. When he visited NTUC 
Fairprice supermarkets, he was impressed by the variety and abundance of 
consumer goods available for our workers, just as Russian Prime Minister 
Ryzkov had been in 1990. When I returned his visit a month later, I dis­
covered from his officials that he had instructed their agencies to learn 
316 From Third World to First 
from Singapore and wherever possible to accord preference to projects pro­
posed by Singapore investors. However, in spite of the many agreements 
signed, our investors found they were not being implemented. Junior offi­
cials used them to extract better offers from other businesspeople. 
Do Muoi was the most important man in Vietnam. Of heavy build, 
with a big face, broad nose, dark complexion, and straight hair parted at 
the side and combed straight toward the two sides, he looked neat and 
tidy. He wore the Vietnamese version of a Mao suit, unlike Kiet who 
dressed in lounge suits. He was not as reform-minded as Kiet, but neither 
was he as conservative as the president, General Le Due Anh. He was the 
balancer and arbiter between the two wings of the party. 
He told me he had been given two of my books when he was in 
Singapore. He had the book of my speeches translated from Chinese into 
Vietnamese, read them all, underlined the key parts on economics, and 
sent them to all his important cadres and ministers to read. He slept lit­
tle, from midnight to 3:00 A.M., exercised for half an hour, and read until 
7:30 A.M. before he started work. Our embassy staff reported that my 
book of speeches translated into Vietnamese was on sale. They had not 
heard of copyright. 
When he asked how he could increase the flow of investments, I sug­
gested they should abandon the habits they learned in guerrilla warfare. 
Development projects for the south that had been approved by the Ho 
Chi Minh authority had to be approved again in the north by Hanoi offi­
cials who knew little about conditions there. It was time-wasting. Next, 
projects approved by the government in Hanoi were often blocked by 
local authorities because of the supremacy of the local commander in 
charge, a legacy from their guerrilla days. 
He spoke with sorrow about Vietnam's unhappy past-1,000 years 
spent fighting China, another 100 years fighting French colonialism and 
imperialism, then fighting for independence after World War II. They 
have had to fight the Japanese, the French, the Americans, and later the 
Pol Pot clique. He did not mention China's attack in 1979. For 140 years, 
the Vietnamese had successfully waged wars to liberate their country. 
Their war wounds were deep, their industries weak, their technology 
backward, their infrastructure deplorable . I sympathized with him, say­
ing that the war was a tragedy for both the United States and Vietnam. 
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 317 
He sighed and said Vietnam would have been a developed, modern coun­
try like Singapore had it not been for the war. 
I reassured him that eventually Vietnam could do better than 
Singapore. There was no reason why the present peace and stability should 
not last for a long time, for the lesson East Asia had learned from the last 
40 years was that war did not pay. In two big wars, in Korea and Vietnam, 
and in the guerrilla war in Cambodia, there had been no victors, only vic­
tims. Do Muoi sadly agreed. 
In fact, the Vietnamese had made progress. As a result of more con­
tacts with foreigners and greater information on the market economy, 
ministers and officials had a better understanding of the workings of the 
free market. Greater street activity, more shops, foreign businesspeople, 
hotels-these were all signs of prosperity in Ho Chi Minh City and 
Hanoi. 
On another visit, in March 1995, First Deputy Prime Minister Phan 
Van Khai led the discussions on economic reforms. He was reputed to 
want to move forward faster. Our investors had run into a thicket of prob­
lems. I told Khai that if he wanted to attract investors, he must make the 
early ones welcome. They should be helped to succeed after they had fixed 
their assets to Vietnam's soil. To treat investors with fixed assets in 
Vietnam as captives was the surest way to drive others away. Their offi­
cials dealt with investors as they had dealt with American soldiers, as ene­
mies to be led into ambush and destroyed. Instead investors should be 
treated as valued friends who need guidance through the maze of their 
bureaucracy with its landmines and other traps. 
I gave some examples of the difficulties our investors had faced. One 
Singapore property developer was building a hotel in Hanoi. Some 30 
households around the site complained of noise and vibration nuisance. 
He agreed to pay each household compensation of US$48 per month. 
Once this was agreed, another 200 householders demanded payment. The 
developer decided to use a different method to bore the piles in without 
noise or vibrations. He was not allowed to do this because his license was 
for the old equipment. 
Next, Singapore Telecom had a joint-venture agreement for a radio­
paging service with Ho Chi Minh Post and Telecoms on a one-year trial 
basis, after which they could apply for a 10-year license. After Singapore 
318 From Third World to First 
Telecom had spent US$1 million to get the system started, Ho Chi Minh 
Post and Telecoms proposed to buy it from them. I told Prime Minister 
Kiet that the sum involved was just a million dollars, but the principle 
was important. If they reneged on the agreement, they would lose the 
confidence of the Singapore business community. Kiet must have inter­
vened to get the project through, but not without further changes to the 
original agreement and several outstanding issues still unresolved. 
Feedback from foreign investors showed that my message did get 
through for Vietnamese officials became more helpful. The CEO of a large 
German company who visited Singapore after Vietnam told me that they 
had provided him with a guide. I smiled in satisfaction. 
The top leaders continued to be fearful of the social ills that followed 
the opening up of Vietnam, and also of losing political control, and 
slowed down liberalization. Unlike China, where most of the mayors and 
provincial governors were young, tertiary-educated men, the top men in 
charge of Vietnam's cities and provinces were all former guerrilla com­
manders. They were aghast at what had happened in Moscow and the 
Soviet Union, and they did not approve of the social evils that had 
infected China's coastal cities. This was not what they had fought for. 
In 1993, I had suggested to Kiet and his team that they promote 
these guerrilla veterans to important advisory positions and allow 
younger men, preferably those with exposure to the West, to take day-to­
day charge. They needed to have men who understood the market econ­
omy and could relate to foreign investors. But the veterans who had 
fought and won the war were in charge and wanted to build the country 
their way. When a younger generation takes over, I believe Vietnam's 
economy will advance faster. Important leadership changes in September 
1997 saw Vice-Premier Phan Van Khai become prime minister in place of 
Kiet and Vice-Premier Tran Due Luong replace General Le Due Ahn as 
president. These were steps toward a younger generation, more widely 
traveled and exposed to the real world, who would know only too well 
how far behind Vietnam was compared to its neighbors. 
In November 1997, I visited Ho Chi Minh City where I met the ris­
ing mayor and secretary of the Ho Chi Minh City party committee, 
Truong Tan Sang. The country was in "holding" mode. Our investors in 
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 319 
Ho Chi Minh City and foreign bankers were aghast at the latest prohibi­
tion: no remittances out from Vietnamese Dong into foreign currency. 
How were they to meet their foreign debts, bank overdrafts, interest pay­
ments due for loans they had taken out in banks overseas for their invest­
ments in Vietnam? How could they carry on business? The ministry of 
trade and industry had been strongly against this move which they knew 
must discourage investors, but could do nothing. The Vietnamese central 
bank and ministry of finance were alarmed by the currency crisis that had 
hit the region and worried about their low foreign exchange reserves. 
In Hanoi I explained to Phan Van Khai why such sudden changes 
were damaging. Many other things had also gone wrong. Singapore 
Telecom had settled its paging business only to run into trouble over its 
mobile phone business. Vietnamese Telecoms did not want to issue the 
license although they had promised one. The Vietnamese wanted to run it 
themselves. I pointed out that Singapore had to follow the trend in the 
developed world in privatizing its telecoms, which had to meet interna­
tional competition. The only way to meet the fiercest competition was to 
operate as a private-sector company with foreign partners bringing in the 
latest technology. He understood, as did Tran Due Luong, with whom I 
covered the same ground. 
Once again I was taken to see Do Muoi. It was, as on previous occa­
sions, a good discussion. But I fear its impact will again be limited. The 
Vietnamese will take some time to shake off their communist straitjackets 
and move freely and flexibly. Once they have done this, I have little doubt 
they can make the grade. The skill with which they used Soviet weapons 
and improvised to overcome critical shortages during the war, and the 
accomplishments of Vietnamese refugees in America and France are 
reminders of their formidable qualities. 
My first visit to Rangoon (Yangon) was in April 1962. Prime Minister U 
Nu of Burma (as Myanmar was called before 1989) had asked General Ne 
Win to take over in 1958 because his elected government could not con­
tain the insurgencies and rebellions of the many minority groups. After 
18 months of military rule, a general election was held. When U Nu's 
320 From Third World to First 
party was returned, Ne Win handed back power. But soon U Nu was in 
difficulties again, and Ne Win seized power in March 1962, just before 
my visit. 
Unlike Colombo, which I visited in 1956, Rangoon seemed dilapi­
dated and run-down. It had been under Japanese occupation, and although 
spared the worst when the British fought their way back from Bengal, the 
damage had been considerable. Ne Win received Choo and me warmly 
at his house. I was disconcerted to see it ringed with guns and tanks. 
Obviously he took no chances. My visit was to counter the propaganda of 
Indonesia's President Sukarno that Malaysia was a neocolonialist plot. 
Over lunch, Ne Win listened to my explanations, but was not attentive. 
He was preoccupied with maintaining law and order, keeping down insur­
rections, and holding Burma together. 
He lived in a medium-sized bungalow in the suburbs. He was 
friendly, as was his wife, Khin May Than (Kitty), a former nurse and a 
vivacious lady. Both were English-speaking and intelligent. Burma was 
one of the better-endowed countries of Southeast Asia, a rice and food 
exporter before the war. However, the democratic system of government 
did not work. The people were not of one race, speaking one language. 
The British had brought together into one country a whole host of differ­
ent races occupying different parts of this mountainous country. 
"The Burmese way to socialism" was Ne Win's motto for the Socialist 
Republic of the Union of Burma. His policy was simple: achieve self­
reliance and get rid of the Indians and Chinese who had come into Burma 
with the British. The Chinese had started to leave even under U Nu, 
many settling in Thailand and Singapore. The larger number were the 
Indians, whom the British had recruited into the government service. 
They were slowly squeezed out. 
My next visit to Rangoon was in May 1965, after attending a confer­
ence for Asian socialists in Bombay. Ne Win liked that part of my speech 
where I had said, "If we approach Asian problems of poverty and underde­
velopment through the rosy spectacles of the Western European socialists 
we are sure to fail." I did not realize at that time how determined he was 
to be self-sufficient, to have little to do with the outside world, and to 
return to a romantic, idyllic past when Burma was rich and self-sufficient. 
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 321 
My one unforgettable conversation during that visit was with the 
butler at the Strand Hotel-an Indian in his late fifties, with greying hair 
and beard. He brought in breakfast looking forlorn and dejected, and said 
in English, "Sir, this is my last day, I shall not be here tomorrow." He did 
not know whether his Burmese assistant would be able to serve me the 
same breakfast: British-style tea with milk and sugar, toast and scrambled 
eggs. I asked why he wanted to leave. He replied, "I have to leave. I was 
born and have lived here all my life, but the government wants all Indians 
to leave. I cannot take with me more than a small sum of money and my 
personal belongings. " Where was he going? "India." Did he have relatives 
there? "No." His grandparents had been brought in by the British but the 
government wanted to send him back. He was right about my breakfast. 
The next day the tray was not as neat nor the toast as crisp. 
That afternoon, Ne Win played golf with me at the former British 
Rangoon Golf Club. It was an extraordinary game. On both sides of every 
fairway and surrounding us, the four players, were troops with guns, fac­
ing outward. When not swinging a club Ne Win wore a steel helmet. I 
hesitated to ask why. His minister, one of the players, murmured some­
thing about an assassination threat. 
When Ne Win visited Singapore in 1968 and played golf, he was not 
security-conscious and did not wear a steel helmet. When he next came, 
in 1974, I suggested we should coordinate our policies to get the United 
States, China, and the Soviet Union to maintain a presence in the region, 
so as to have some power balance. He was not in the least interested, pre­
ferring to leave these matters to the superpowers. 
I last visited Rangoon in January 1986. Ne Win's new wife was a doc­
tor, well-educated and much younger than Kitty, who had died. Ne Win 
had an excellent recall of events that happened 15 to 30 years ago. Over 
dinner, I found that despite Burma's 20 years of economic stagnation, he 
was as distrustful of foreign powers as ever. He spoke of being locked in a 
"battle of wits" against elements outside Burma who wanted to make as 
much as they could at the expense of his country. 
It was sad to see Rangoon worse than it had been since my 1965 visit. 
There were no new roads or buildings. Everything was in disrepair and 
there were potholes in the main roads. The few cars were of 1950s or 
322 From Third World to First 
1960s vintage. There was nothing any of his ministers could do, given his 
policies. The English newspaper was a single-leaf , four-page tabloid. The 
Burmese paper was slightly less skimpy. The people in attendance at their 
famous Shwe Dagon pagoda looked shabby and poor. From my car, the 
shops looked empty. 
When his prime minister, Maung Maung Kha, visited Singapore in 
September 1986, I tried to interest him in tourism, telling him of an arti­
cle I had read in the Singapore American (a publication of our American 
community), in which two teachers from the American School described 
their visit to Rangoon, Mandalay, and Pagan. They had hitchhiked for 
part of the journey and found it a fascinating adventure. I suggested that 
he open up Burma, build hotels, and get safe aircraft to fly from Rangoon 
to Mandalay and Pagan. He would get large numbers of tourists and con­
siderable revenue. He listened quietly but said little. Nothing happened. 
Ne Win did not want foreigners in Burma. 
Only in 1993, when Lieutenant General Khin Nyunt, one of their 
key leaders, saw me in Singapore did I find a leader who was responsive, 
probably because Ne Win had had a change of heart. Ne Win must have 
told him that I was an old friend because he listened quietly as I explained 
that Myanmar had to adjust to the post-Cold War world, open up its 
economy, and develop the whole country. I pointed to China and Viet­
nam, two examples of former closed countries that were developing their 
tourism and inviting foreign investors to create jobs and wealth. 
Khin Nyunt was then in charge of intelligence and the strongman of 
the junta or SLORC (State Law and Order Restoration Council). I asked 
him to reconsider his policy toward Aung San Suu Kyi, the daughter of 
Burma's hero and first prime minister, Aung San. She had married an 
Englishman but had returned to Myanmar to lead a movement against 
the military government. They could not lock her up forever; she would 
be a continuing embarrassment to their government. 
Myanmar had to improve the lives of the people, co-opt capable peo­
ple with experience abroad into the government. A government of mili­
tary officers could never get the economy going. I suggested he should 
make it possible for Singapore to engage and help Myanmar economically. 
Singapore could defend its position internationally, if this engagement 
was to help Myanmar return to normalcy, not to maintain the present sys-
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 323 
tern. My note taker, a ministry of foreign affairs desk officer for Myanmar, 
was fearful that he would react strongly and was surprised when, at the 
end of the discussion, he thanked me for my "valuable opinion." 
When General Than Shwe, the Myanmar prime minister and chair­
man of SLORC, visited Singapore in June 1995, I suggested that he visit 
Indonesia to learn how it had changed from a military leadership, with 
General Suharto in charge, to an elected presidency. The Indonesian con­
stitution gave the army a direct role in government, with representation 
in the legislature under a system called dwi-fungsi (two functions). The 
Indonesian army had a constitutional role in ensuring the security and 
integrity of the country. Elections for the president and the legislature 
were held every five years. Myanmar had to go in that direction if it 
wanted to be like the other countries in Southeast Asia. 
I had called on Ne Win when he visited Singapore for medical treat­
ment a year earlier, in 1994. He talked about his peace and serenity of 
mind through his practice of meditation. For two years after he withdrew 
from government in 1988, he had been in torment, fretting and worrying 
about what was going on in the country. Then in 1990 he began to read 
about meditation. He now spent many hours each day, in the morning, 
afternoon, and evening, in silent meditation. He certainly looked much 
better than the sickly person I had met in Rangoon in 1986. 
He was in Singapore again in 1997 to see his doctors. At the age of 
86, he looked even better than on his last visit. This time he spoke only 
about meditation, giving me advice on how I could improve my medita­
tion. I asked if he did not worry about the sickness of his loved ones, like 
children and grandchildren. Yes he did, but he could control, reduce, and 
forget these sufferings through meditation. Did he not worry when his 
old generals asked for his advice? No, he replied; when they did this, he 
told them never to talk about their work because he had retired from the 
troubles of this world. However, diplomats told me he commanded 
respect and authority within the military and could still wield influence. 
The West, especially the United States, believed that economic sanc­
tions could force the government to hand power to Aung San Suu Kyi, 
who had won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1991. I did not think this was 
likely. The army has been Myanmar's only instrument of government 
since Ne Win took power in 1962. The military leaders can be persuaded 
324 From Third World to First 
to share power and gradually civilianize the government. But unless the 
United States or the United Nations is prepared to send in armed forces 
to hold the country together, as it is doing in Bosnia, Myanmar without 
the army would be ungovernable . The West is impatient with Asean's 
constructive engagement and was puzzled when its leaders admitted 
Myanmar as a member in July 1997. But what better way was there to 
have the country develop, open up, and gradually change? In Cambodia, a 
UN force that supervized elections could not install the winner into gov­
ernment because the de facto government under Hun Sen controlled the 
army, the police, and the administration. 
The generals will eventually have to adjust and change to a form of 
government more like their Asean neighbors'. This will come about 
sooner if their contacts with the international community increase. 
I preter to remember Cambodia as that oasis of peace and prosperity in the 
war-torn Indochina of the 1960s. Choo and I made our first visit to 
Phnom Penh, its capital, in 1962. Prince Norodom Sihanouk personall y 
greeted us at the airport and had dancers in traditional costume scatter 
flower petals on the red carpet as we walked to the car after I had 
inspected a guard of honor. Phnom Penh was like a French provincial 
town, quiet and peaceful with wide boulevards reminiscent of the 
Champs Elysees in Paris lined with trees and flanked by side roads also 
shaded by trees. There was even a monumental archway, a Khmer version 
of the Arc de Triomphe, at the center of a major crossroads, the Place de 
e'Independance. We stayed at the Palais du Gouvernement, formerly the 
residence of the French governor general, by the Mekong River. Sihanouk 
himself lived in the old palace. He entertained us to dinner in grand style, 
then flew us in his personal Russian aircraft to see Angkor Wat. 
Sihanouk was an extraordinary personality, highly intelligent and full 
of energy and joie de vivre. He had the airs and graces of an educated 
French gentleman, with all the accompanying gestures and mannerisms, 
and spoke English the French way. Medium in height, a little rotund, he 
had a broad face with flared nostrils like the stone carvings on the temples 
around Angkor Wat. He was an excellent host who made each visit a 
memorable and enjoyable occasion. His banquets of French haute cuisine, 
Viecnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 325 
with the best French wines and beautiful cutlery to match, were a treat. I 
remember going to his palace in the provincial capital of Batambang, 
driving up to a raised entrance typical of driveways in French chateaux. 
As we arrived, short Cambodian guards, looking dwarfed by their thigh­
high gleaming black Napoleonic boots with helmets to match, saluted 
with glinting swords. The reception and banquet halls were luxuriously 
furnished and air-conditioned. There was a Western and a Cambodian 
orchestra. Foreign diplomats were in attendance. It was a royal occasion. 
The prince was mercurial, hypersensitive to criticism. He would 
answer every press article that was in any way critical. Politics for him was 
the press and publicity. When he was overthrown in the 1970 coup he 
said that he sought refuge in Beijing because he feared for his life. I 
believe that had he returned to Cambodia then, no soldier would have 
dared to shoot him on arrival at the airport. He was their god-king. He 
had kept Cambodia an oasis of peace and plenty in a troubled, war­
ravaged Indochina by maintaining a precarious balance between the com­
munists and the West. He sought the friendship and protection of the 
Chinese while he kept his ties with the West through France. When he 
stayed in Beijing instead of returning to defy the coup makers, the old 
Cambodia was destroyed. 
I met him again when he came to Singapore in September 1981 for 
talks on forming a coalition with the Khmer Rouge. It was a changed 
Sihanouk. He had gone back to Phnom Penh and been a captive of the 
Khmer Rouge. He had been through a harrowing time; many of his chil­
dren and grandchildren had been killed by Pol Pot, and he himself was in 
fear for his life. The old bouncy Sihanouk had been destroyed. His laugh­
ter, the high-pitched shrill voice when he got excited, his gestures-all 
were more muted. He was a living tragedy, a symbol of what had hap­
pened to his country and his people. The Chinese had rescued him just 
before the Vietnamese captured Phnom Penh at the beginning of 1979. 
He appeared before the UN Security Council to speak against the Viet­
namese invasion, and he became the international symbol of Cambodian 
resistance. For a long time he was unforgiving and adamant against a 
coalition government with the Khmer Rouge. 
After the Khmer Rouge occupied Phnom Penh, the Cambodians, or 
Kampucheans as they called themselves during Pol Pot's regime, were not 
326 From Third World to First 
active in the region. A senior minister, Ieng Sary, visited me in March 
1977. He was soft-spoken, round-faced, and chubby; he looked the soft­
est, kindest person, one who would look after babies tenderly. He was the 
brother-in-law and trusted aide of the infamous Pol Pot, the Khmer 
Rouge leader who had slaughtered from 1 to 2 million Cambodians out of 
a population of 7 million, including most of the educated, Cambodia's 
brightest and best. He made no reference to this genocide and I decided 
against questioning him. He was bound to deny, as their Khmer Rouge 
broadcasts did, that it ever took place. Ieng Sary was realistic. He wanted 
trade-barter trade. He needed spare parts for factories, pumps for irriga­
tion, and outboard motors for their fishing boats. In exchange, he offered 
fish from the Tonle Sap, Cambodia's famous inland lake which flooded 
every year and produced excellent fish. The barter trade did not flourish 
(they had problems with logistics), so we had little trade or anything else 
to do with them. 
Relations between Vietnam and Cambodia deteriorated with border 
clashes. Vietnam attacked Cambodia in 1978 and captured it in January 
1979. Thereafter, Cambodia existed in my consciousness only through 
our activities in and out of the UN to garner votes to block the Viet­
namese puppet government from taking over Cambodia's UN seat, and 
through our support for Cambodian resistance forces operating from the 
Thai-Cambodian border. 
Sihanouk's son, Prince Ranariddh, I had met several times between 
1981 and 1991. His father had placed him in charge of the royalist forces 
near the Thai border with Cambodia. Ranariddh resembled his father in 
voice, mannerisms, facial expression, and body language. He was darker­
complexioned and smaller, more equable in temperament and less swayed 
by the mood of the moment, but otherwise much in the same mold. He 
had his father's fluency in French and had taught law in Lyon University 
before he took over the leadership of the royalist forces. 
When I inspected their training camp in northeast Thailand in the 
1980s I noted that it was not well organized and lacked military spirit. It 
was the best Ranariddh could do because, like him, his generals and offi­
cers spent more time in Bangkok than in the camp. As we were support­
ing them with weapons and radio equipment, I felt disappointed. After 
Vietnam, Myanmar, and Cambodia 327 
the 1991 settlement, the big aid donors took over. Ranariddh became the 
first prime minister (with Hun Sen as second prime minister) when his 
party won the 1993 UN-organized election. When we met in Singapore 
that August, I warned him that the coalition was a precarious arrange­
ment. The military, police, and administration belonged to Hun Sen. If 
he wanted to survive, Ranariddh had to win over a part of Hun Sen's army 
and police officers and some of the provincial governors. Being called the 
first prime minister and having his man appointed defense minister were 
of little value when the officers and troops were loyal to Hun Sen. He 
probably did not take my words to heart. He might have believed that his 
royal blood would assure him the support of the people, that he would be 
irreplaceable. 
I met Hun Sen in Singapore in December that same year. He was a 
totally different character, a tough survivor of the Khmer Rouge, a prime 
minister appointed by the Vietnamese in the 1980s but agile enough to dis­
tance himself from them and be acceptable to the Americans and West 
Europeans. He left an impression of strength and ruthlessness. He under­
stood power, that it came from the barrel of the gun, which he was deter­
mined to hold. Once the Khmer Rouge were on the decline, and Ranariddh 
could no longer team up with them to challenge him, Hun Sen ousted him 
in 1997 and took complete control, while remaining nominally second 
prime minister. Sihanouk had become king again after the 1993 election, 
but his poor health and frequent absences from Cambodia for cancer treat­
ment in Beijing had taken him out of the cockpit of power now occupied 
completely by Hun Sen and his army. 
Cambodia is like a porcelain vase that has been smashed into myriads 
of shards. To put them together will be a slow and laborious task. As with 
all mended porcelain, it cannot withstand much pressure. Pol Pot had 
killed 90 percent of Cambodia's intelligentsia and trained personnel. The 
country now lacks a coherent administration. The people have been accus­
tomed to lawless conditions for so long that they are no longer law­
abiding. Only the gun is feared. 
The people of Cambodia are the losers. The country is crushed, its 
educated class decimated, its economy devastated. Hun Sen's coup caused 
Cambodia's admission into Asean to be postponed. It was eventually 
328 From Third World to First 
admitted in April 1999 because no country wanted to spend US$2 billion 
for another UN operation to hold fair elections. Cambodia had had 27 
years of war since Lon Nol's 1970 coup. Its present leaders are the prod­
ucts of bitter, relentless struggles in which opponents were either elimi­
nated or neutralized. They are utterly merciless and ruthless, without 
humane feelings. History has been cruel to the Cambodians. 
20. Asean-Unpr omising Start, 
Promising Future 
Asean was formed in August 1967 amid great uncertainty in the region. 
In a low-key ceremony , the foreign ministers of Indonesia, Malaysia, the 
Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand met in Bangkok to sign the declara­
tion. The war in Vietnam was spreading into Cambodia and the region 
was caught up in communist insurgencies. I did not set great store by the 
lofty aims of the group: to accelerate economic growth, social progress, 
and cultural development; to promote peace and stability; to collaborate 
in agriculture and industry and expand trade. The unspoken objective was 
to gain strength through solidarity ahead of the power vacuum that 
would come with an impending British, and later a possible U.S., with­
drawal. Indonesia wanted to reassure Malaysia and Singapore that, with 
the end of the Sukarno era, its intentions were peaceful and it had aban­
doned Sukarno's aggressive policies. Thailand wanted to associate itself 
with its noncommunist neighbors who were members of the Non­
Aligned Movement. The Philippines wanted a forum to push its claim to 
North Borneo. Singapore sought the understanding and support of its 
neighbors in enhancing stability and security in the region. 
It took 10 years before we developed cohesion and direction in our 
activities, time for the leaders and officials to get to know and take the 
measure of each other. We had a common enemy-the communist threat 
in guerrilla insurgencies, backed by North Vietnam, China, and the 
Soviet Union. We needed stability and growth to counter and deny the 
330 From Third World to First 
communists the social and economic conditions for revolutions. America 
and the West were prepared to help us. 
The role of President Suharto was crucial for the success of Asean. 
After some false starts by pushy Indonesian officials, Suharto moderated 
the approach to one diametrically different from India's vis-a-vis the 
member countries of SAARC (South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation). Under Suharto, Indonesia did not act like a hegemon. It did 
not insist on its point of view but took into consideration the policies and 
interests of the other members. This made it possible for the others to 
accept Indonesia as first among equals. 
While Asean's declared objectives were economic, social, and cultural, 
all knew that progress in economic cooperation would be slow. We were 
banding together more for political objectives, stability, and security. 
Asean succeeded in creating a sense of stability and security, but as 
expected, initially there was little tangible progress. When I addressed 
the fifth ministerial meeting of Asean foreign ministers in Singapore in 
April 1972, I drew attention to the gap between the large number of proj­
ects proposed and the few actually implemented. Each year there were 
100 to 200 recommendations but only 10 to 20 were implement ed. 
The fall of Saigon to the communists in April 197 5 increased our 
sense of the danger from subversion and insurgency . Asean had to under­
take economic development more effectively to reduce domestic discon­
tent. At a bilateral meeting with Suharto in Bali in September 197 5, I 
tried to persuade him to agree to set economic targets for Asean at its first 
summit, which Indonesia would host, and to go for a trade liberalization 
policy, starting with a 10 percent reduction of tariffs on selected items by 
member countries and leading eventually to a free trade area. I thought he 
was sympathetic. To make the summit a success, we agreed to concentrate 
on issues that would show solidarity and put aside those that would 
divide us. 
Ali Moertopo, Suharto's close aide, later told K. C. Lee, our ambas­
sador, that after the president met me, his technocrats had advised him 
against free trade. These words conjured fears of a free-for-all competition 
in which Indonesia would become a dumping ground for the goods of 
other Asean countries, jeopardizing its chances of industrialization. 
Asean-U npromising Start, Promising Future 331 
Politically, the Asean summit in February 1976 in Bali was a success. 
Asean had shown solidarity at a time of great uncertainty. For Indonesia , 
the host, there was a bonus. Held in the wake of the crisis caused by its 
occupation of East Timar, it improved President Suharto's international 
position. However, Suharto was not at ease at these formal summit meet­
ings. He spoke only Bahasa Indonesia and could not engage in a free 
exchange in English. He preferred bilateral meetings. Then he would 
speak with animation and vigor in Bahasa Indonesia and, in the late 
1980s, use English words and phrases to get his ideas across. The next 
summit was the following year, 1977, in Kuala Lumpur. Again I could 
see he was not comfortable, so the next one was not held until 10 years 
later, in Manila. By the time it was Singapore 's turn to host a summit in 
1992, I was no longer prime minister and did not attend. 
We did not succeed in lowering tariffs between ourselves, but regular 
and frequent meetings led to easy personal and working relations between 
Asean ministers and officials. This helped them to solve bilateral prob­
lems informally before they became the subjects of third-party notes. 
Officials and ministers evolved a style of working that made it possible 
for disputes to be muted if not resolved, and for a more cooperative atti­
tude to take hold. They played golf at their meetings. Between golf 
swings, they would test out their ideas and proposals, which could be 
turned down with less contention than at a formal meeting. They would 
also hold singing sessions after their dinners; it was obligatory for each 
minister to belt out one of his country's popular ditties. Singapore minis­
ters were self-conscious and awkward. They did not do this at home. The 
Filipinos, Thais, and Indonesians were naturals, singing being a necessary 
part of their electioneering. To Western diplomats, such activities may 
appear inane. In fact they break the ice between people who, although 
close geographic neighbors, are strangers because they had been kept 
apart from each other for over a century by different colonial spheres of 
influence. Through these regular consultations and meetings, where busi­
ness and recreation were equally important on the official agenda, habits 
of cooperation and compromise evolved. Asean officials tried to avoid con­
frontation, seeking consensus as the ideal. Where consensus was not pos­
sible, they settled for a compromise or a promise of cooperation. 
332 From Third World to First 
When Asean had to deal with the developed countries, cooperation 
came naturally. We learned the value of political coordination when nego­
tiating with Americans, Europeans in the European Economic Community, 
and Japanese. On their part, these industrial countries preferred to deal 
with us as a group. They wanted to encourage Asean for its rational and 
moderate position in international forums that led to practical outcomes. 
They wanted other regional groupings of developing countries to adopt 
Asean's pragmatic approach. 
One example of Asean's value to its members was when Australia 
tried to change its civil aviation rules. In October 1978, it announced its 
new Australian International Civil Aviation Policy (ICAP) under which 
only Qantas and British Airways could carry passengers point-to-point 
between Australia and Britain and at supercheap fares. Airlines of inter­
mediate stops, such as Singapore and the other Asean capitals, were 
excluded. Passengers were prevented by these special fares from making 
stopovers en route. The Australians also planned to reduce the capacity of 
the airlines of the intermediate Asean countries and cut the frequency of 
Singapore Airlines' flights between Singapore and both Australia and 
Britain. They wanted to disallow Thai International from taking passen­
gers from Singapore, an intermediate point, on to Australia. The Austral­
ians wanted to discuss the issue only bilaterally with each affected coun­
try, but Asean economic ministers took a common stand against this. To 
thwart them, our Asean partners asked for time to consider the long-term 
implications of these changes which would cut out Asean airlines from 
the trunk route business and leave us with stunted regional airlines. Then 
we sorted out our divergent interests to present a united position. 
I concluded that Boeing 747s flying from Australia to Europe would 
need to stop either in Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, or Bangkok en route to 
London. Jakarta was too close to Australia, and Colombo too far; both 
stops were not economic. We set out to keep the Malaysians and the Thais 
on our side. I instructed our officials to make enough concessions to the 
Malaysians and Thais so that they would join us in the fight. 
I wrote to Thai Prime Minister General Kriangsak in January 1979 
that Australia's move was "blatantly protectionist, " that they wanted to 
exploit our differences by offering different inducements and threats. He 
Asean-Unpromisin g Start, Promisin g Future 333 
supported me. My relations with General Kriangsak were close. And we 
gave enough concessions to Malaysian Airlines for Malaysia to stay united 
in Asean. 
At first, the Australians nearly succeeded in isolating Singapore and 
dividing the Asean countries, playing one against the other. But Asean 
solidarity hardened after a meeting when the Australian secretary for 
transport spoke in tough terms to Asean civil aviation officials. This was 
reported to Dr. Mahathir, then Malaysia's deputy prime minister and 
minister for trade and industry. He was still angry over a visit to Australia 
with his prime minister, Tun Razak, during which they had been harassed 
by protesters. Mahathir stiffened Malaysia's stand against the Australians. 
From a bilateral dispute between Singapore and Australia, the ICAP issue 
escalated into an Asean versus Australia fight. Harsh words were traded in 
the press. Annoyed with the offhand attitudes of the Australian officials, 
the Indonesians threatened to deny their airspace to Australian aircraft if 
they insisted on ICAP. The Australian foreign minister, Andrew Peacock, 
visited Singapore to defuse the issue. Australia agreed to let Singapore 
Airlines retain its capacity and routing into Australia and allowed the 
other Asean airlines to increase their capacities. It was a lesson on the ben­
efits of solidarity. 
One problem that was to test Asean's solidarity from 1978 to 1991 was 
Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia. After the Vietnamese attacked 
Cambodia on 25 December 1978, Raja as foreign minister took the initia­
tive to convene a special meeting of Asean foreign ministers in Bangkok 
on 12 January 1979. In a joint statement, they deplored the invasion and 
called for the withdrawal of all foreign forces in Cambodia. When the 
Vietnamese were advancing in Cambodia toward its border with Thai­
land, the situation became dangerous. However, the Chinese punitive 
expedition against Vietnam in February 1979 stabilized the position. The 
question then was how to prevent the Heng Samrin regime, installed in 
Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese, from dislodging Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge 
government from its seat in the United Nations. Their genocide of their 
own people had caused worldwide abhorrence and revulsion against the 
334 From Third World to First 
Khmer Rouge. But if we wanted to keep the Vietnamese from getting 
international recognition for their puppet regime, we had no choice but 
to support the Khmer Rouge government. 
Raja was a born crusader; the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia pro­
vided him with a cause that stirred his idealism. He wrote powerful short 
memos, which we circulated to nonaligned countries, detailing how the 
big bullying Vietnamese, the Prussians of Southeast Asia, had pulverized 
and oppressed the weak and gentle Cambodians, one-tenth their size. A 
pleasant personality , neither arrogant nor meek, Raja was friendly, warm, 
and obviously sincere. His efforts made it easier for Tommy Koh in New 
York and ambassadors and officials from other countries to rally the votes 
against Vietnam at the UN and other international gatherings. Best of all, 
he did this without upsetting Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, the Indonesian 
foreign minister, who was under orders from his president not to isolate 
Vietnam. Suharto wanted a strong Vietnam to block any southward 
expansion of China. Raja and Tengku Rithauddeen, Malaysia's foreign 
minister, together persuaded Mochtar at least not to oppose the Thai 
policy and weaken the unity of Asean. The isolation of Vietnam was a 
decade-long saga in which Raja played a significant role. 
Unexpected ly, a year later, on 24 December 1979, the Soviets invaded 
Afghanistan. It was a turning point; as President Carter said, the scales 
had fallen from his eyes. The U.S. government became more anti-Soviet 
and anti-Vietnam. It also changed the attitudes of our two Muslim neigh­
bors, Indonesia and Malaysia. Both President Suharto and Prime Minister 
Mahathir stiffened their positions against the Soviet Union. They were 
suspicious of Soviet aims and their use of Vietnam. India was isolated as 
the only Asian country recognizing the Heng Samrin regime. 
Our intelligence reports, confirmed by the Thais, showed that the 
Vietnamese occupation army of 170,000 were controlling all Cambodia's 
population centers and most of its countryside. The Heng Samrin 
regime's forces, some 30,000, were plagued by low morale and desertions. 
We were encouraged by reports of increasing popular resistance to 
Vietnamese occupation. The Khmer Rouge forces had withdrawn to the 
mountainous regions in the west, near the Thai border. Noncommunist 
resistance groups, which had been fighting the Khmer Rouge under com­
manders loyal to the old Lon Nol government, had coalesced to fight the 
Asean-Unpromisin g Scare, Promising Future 335 
Vietnamese. Our officials worked hard to get Sihanouk and Son Sann to 
form a coalition government with the Khmer Rouge, but both feared and 
hated the Khmer Rouge. 
Son Sann's relationship with Sihanouk was that of commoner and 
prince. At a meeting with his followers in Singapore in 1981, Son Sann 
was told by one of our officials that Sihanouk wanted to see them imme­
diately. His whole delegation became nervous, overawed, and could not 
refuse to attend, even though Sihanouk no longer wielded any authority. 
It took another year before Sihanouk and Son Sann were persuaded by 
the Chinese, Thais, and us to meet in Kuala Lumpur to sign a formal 
agreement for a Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea 
(CGDK). The Thais and Chinese persuaded the three parties to agree that 
Prince Sihanouk be the president, Khieu Samphan the vice president, and 
Son Sann the prime minister of the CGDK. I urged them to sign it in 
Kuala Lumpur, not in Beijing, because that would have made it appear a 
Chinese-sponsored coalition which would not receive wide support in the 
UN. I thought it important for the Vietnamese to see that Asean was 
united in support of the CGDK, that this was not just a Thai-Singapore 
project. Ghazali Shafie, the capable Malaysian foreign minister, was eager 
to take an active role. I was able to persuade Prime Minister Mahathir to 
support it. Once the agreement to form the CGDK had been signed in 
Kuala Lumpur, the Indonesians could not disavow it without risking 
their isolation in Asean. Sure enough, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja now 
agreed that Asean must support the noncommunist third force. 
Sihanouk's forte was in propaganda and diplomatic maneuvring. The 
real power players were the Khmer Rouge leaders. Once they had broken 
out of their isolation as international outcasts by having Sihanouk and 
Son Sann associated with them in the coalition government, they built up 
their strength. The Chinese kept them well supplied with weapons and 
money. They also had income from their control of the gem mines and 
timber logging business along the border with Thailand. 
For the Vietnamese, the formation of this coalition government was 
bad news. They reacted with venom, describing it as "a monster con­
ceived by Chinese expansionism and U.S. imperialism." The Vietnamese 
foreign minister had repeatedly declared that the situation in Cambodia 
was irreversible and nonnegotiable. The Chinese challenged it and the 
336 From Third World to First 
United States helped to oppose it. As we had hoped, international support 
for the coalition government increased, and any prospect of recognition 
for the Vietnamese puppet regime of Heng Samrin vanished. 
The Vietnamese had been admired by Third World countries as great 
heroes after they defeated the Americans in 197 5 and captured Saigon. 
Now they were defying world opinion, bullying a small neighbor, and 
becoming international villains. They were embroiled in a guerrilla war 
which, like the Americans in Vietnam, they could not win. They were to 
be bogged down in Cambodia for a further seven years until they with­
drew in September 1989, but continued to be politically involved until 
the Paris Peace Accord in October 1991. We spent three years laboriously 
smoothing out differences between the Cambodians and sorting out the 
positions of China, Thailand, and Singapore, in order to bring along 
Malaysia and Indonesia and satisfy the Americans that they were not sup­
porting the Khmer Rouge's return to power. 
Raja and I worked hard to ensure that the United States remained 
interested in the region. Whether it was President Carter with Secretary 
Cyrus Vance, or President Reagan with Secretary George Shultz, I found 
them reluctant to play a major role. They did not want to be involved in 
another guerrilla war on the Asian mainland. We managed to persuade 
them to give modest aid, at first nonlethal, and later some lethal, to the 
two noncommunist resistance forces. But the Americans did help to 
gather votes in the UN against the Vietnamese. 
Tommy Koh, our permanent representative at the UN, played a key 
role in lobbying and rallying votes. At the UN general assembly in 1982, 
Sihanouk as president of the newly formed coalition government appealed 
to UN members to restore Cambodia's independence and sovereignty. 
They responded by voting for Democratic Kampuchea with a bigger mar­
gin, a total of 105 member states. By gathering more votes in the UN 
each year, we made the Vietnamese feel their growing isolation. 
Deng Xiaoping deterred any assault against Thailand by attacking 
Vietnam in February 1979. The price was paid in Chinese blood. Zhao 
Ziyang spelled out to me in Beijing in 1980 that by its "counteraction in 
self-defense " against Vietnam in 1979, China had forced Vietnam to sta­
tion 60 percent of its best troops along the Sino-Vietnam border. If these 
men had been free to fight in Cambodia, he said, the next international 
Asean-Unpromising Start, Promising Future 337 
conference would have been about a peaceful settlement of Thailand's 
problem with Vietnam, not Cambodia's. But Zhao tacitly acknowledged 
that China alone could not resolve the Cambodian problem. It needed the 
United States and Asean co muster international support. 
In Washington in June 1981, at a one-on-one meeting with President 
Reagan, I spoke of the Soviets making trouble for Southeast Asia. I 
assured him that Deng Xiaoping had said that China did not want satel­
lite states around it and was prepared to accept whoever won in a free vote 
in Cambodia. This helped to win Reagan's support. He was absolutely 
against the Vietnamese and their puppet regime. 
When I proposed to John Holdridge, the assistant secretary of state 
for East Asia and the Pacific, in November 1981 in Singapore, that who­
ever won in a UN-supervised election could be allowed to take over 
Cambodia, and that Heng Samrin could possibly win, he interjected with 
vehemence, "I am not sure that that is acceptable. They are too commit­
ted to the Soviets." His expression, tone, and manner left me with no 
doubt that a Heng Samrin victory was as unacceptable to the Americans 
as to the Chinese. In August 1982, officials from the U.S. State Depart­
ment and the CIA told our mission that the United States would fund 
the noncommunist resistance group in Cambodia by a total of US$4 
million for nonlethal aid-food and medicine-to supplement Asean's 
efforts. It was a small beginning but an important breakthrough. The 
Reagan administration was getting over its Vietnam withdrawal syn­
drome and was prepared, in a subsidiary role, to support the noncommu­
nist resistance. This encouraged Malaysia to supply training and uni­
forms. Singapore gave the first few hundreds of several batches of AK-47 
automatic rifles, hand grenades, ammunition, and communications 
equipment. 
With help from Britain, we employed British technicians and jour­
nalists to teach 14 Cambodians from the KPNLF to broadcast on short­
wave radio from Singapore, and later to run a medium-wave station near 
the Thai border. They learned how to operate 25kW mobile Japanese 
transmitters. Together with the Thais and Malaysians, Singapore trained 
the guerrilla fighters. In 1983-1984, for the first time, resistance forces 
spearheaded by the Khmer Rouge continued on the offensive well into 
the dry season instead of retreating into Thailand. 
338 From Third World to First 
Meeting Secretary of State George Shultz in Singapore in July 1984, I 
urged a reconsideration of U.S. policy of small, limited amounts of aid; 
the current U.S. policy would result in maximum benefits to China. We 
were providing the Khmer Rouge and China with political support that 
they could not muster on their own. Chinese military aid had ensured 
that the Khmer Rouge remained the strongest force. The United States 
should invest in the noncommunists to help them build up to their maxi­
mum potential, especially after they had shown promise of fighting capa­
bility and were enjoying more support among the Cambodian people 
than the Khmer Rouge. Shultz agreed it was worth a try, but pointed out 
that U.S. aid had to be sustainable. Unless the amounts were modest, it 
would be difficult to get yearly votes in Congress. He knew the senti­
ments in the U.S. Congress. 
Shultz was right; the U.S. Congress would not support a significant 
aid program. Our representative on the Thai-Malaysian-Singapore- U.S. 
group that met regularly in Bangkok to coordinate our program esti­
mated that the United States dispensed a total of about US$150 million 
in covert and overt aid to the noncommun ist groups, Singapore US$55 
million, Malaysia US$ l O million, and Thailand a few million in training, 
ammunition, food, and operational funds. This was dwarfed by China 
who spent some US$ I 00 million on the noncommunist forces of Son Sann 
and Sihanouk and 10 times that amount on the Khmer Rouge. 
As it turned out, the Soviet Union was bleeding from the war in 
Afghanistan and its massive aid to Vietnam, Ethiopia, Angola, and Cuba. 
By the late 1980s, Soviet aid had stopped and Vietnam was in economic 
difficulties; it had an inflation rate of above 1,000 percent in 1988 and a 
food crisis. It had to get out of Cambodia. The Vietnamese old guard gave 
way to leaders who wanted to settle the Cambodian issue with China and 
open up their economy to save it from collapse. In July 1988, they unilat­
erally announced their withdrawal of 50,000 troops from Cambodia. 
U.S. Congressman Stephen Solarz, in charge of Asia Pacific affairs in 
the House foreign relations committee, met me in Singapore and floated 
the proposal of a UN force to fill the power vacuum and hold elections. I 
encouraged him to pursue it. When Australian Foreign Minister Gareth 
Evans took up the proposal formally, Singapore and the other Asean 
members supported it. After the final agreement was signed in Paris on 
Asean-Unpr omisin g Scare, Promisin g Future 339 
23 October 1991, the UN despatched an advance peacekeeping force, 
followed by the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC). 
Sihanouk returned to Phnom Penh in November 1991 from Beijing, 
escorted by Hun Sen who had succeeded Heng Samrin. 
UNTAC was the largest and most costly UN peacekeeping mission to 
date---over US$2 billion for a contingent of 20,000 civilians and soldiers. 
It held elections successfully in May 1993. Sihanouk's party, led by his son, 
Prince Ranariddh, won the most seats, 58 against the 51 seats won by Hun 
Sen. But the Americans had changed their position on the Vietnamese 
puppet government: They must have been satisfied that Hun Sen wanted 
to be independent from Vietnam and were prepared to let him achieve 
power. The UN did not have the strength or will to install Ranariddh 
in power. It would have required disarming Hun Sen's troops and fight­
ing the Khmer Rouge. So, the UN brokered a compromise that made 
Ranariddh the nominal first prime minister, but left real power in the 
hands of the second prime minister, Hun Sen, who was in charge of the 
army, the police, and the administration. 
UNTAC began to leave by November 1993, its limited mission of 
holding elections with minimum loss of lives accomplished. Thereafter, 
Singapore became just an observer of the Cambodian drama. The big pow­
ers were dealing directly with each other to resolve the issue. China was the 
only country that had given support to the Khmer Rouge. Premier Li Peng 
told me in Beijing in October 1990 that although the Khmer Rouge had 
made mistakes in the past, they had also made contributions. In other 
words, they deserved a place in government. But once the Soviets agreed 
with the Americans to end the war in Vietnam by stopping their military 
aid, especially oil supplies, China's influence on the outcome diminished. 
With the Vietnamese out of Cambodia, Asean solidarity weakened. 
Thai Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhavan wanted to seize the economic 
opportunities in Vietnam's rehabilitation through trade and investments. 
He overrode his foreign minister, Siddhi Savetsila, who said it was not yet 
time to make concessions. When Thailand shifted its position, the Indo­
nesians also moved. They wanted a strong Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia 
as a bloc to check any southward thrust of China's influence. 
Singapore had sent a police contingent to help UNTAC. During the 
conflict, few countries gave aid to the noncommunist forces. We did, and 
340 From Third World to First 
our contribution in arms, ammunition, and equipment, plus political and 
diplomatic efforts on their behalf, helped to bring about the final out­
come. But we knew the limits of our influence and went along with the 
UN solution for an interim government and fair elections. Both these 
objectives were more or less achieved. Hun Sen, his army, police, and 
administrators remained in firm control. Prince Ranariddh and his 
FUNCINPEC ministers provided Hun Sen and the former pro-Vietnam 
communists with the international respectability they needed to get aid. 
The Khmer Rouge lost out completely , so great was the international 
revulsion against Pol Pot for his genocidal crimes. Vietnam failed to make 
Cambodia its satellite despite paying a heavy price for 13 years. 
We had spent much time and resources to thwart the Vietnamese in 
Cambodia because it was in our interests that aggression be seen not to 
pay. Indeed, Indonesia's costly experience in East Timor underlines this 
lesson. Twenty-four years after occupying it, Indonesia had to withdraw 
after the UN-supervised referendum in September 1999. 
By the mid-l 980s, Asean had established itself as a rational Third World 
grouping and was becoming the most dynamic region of the developing 
world. By opening up their economies to trade and foreign investments as 
recommended by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, 
the countries of Asean achieved 6 to 8 percent economic growth yearly 
for more than a decade. Their economic dynamism made them attractive 
as economic and political partners. Regular dialogue started with the 
Australians and New Zealanders, followed by the Japanese, Americans, and 
West Europeans. As Asean grew into a coherent organization with a com­
mon voice on major issues, more countries wanted to join as its dialogue 
partners at its annual meetings to discuss political and economic issues. 
The common threat of communism from North Vietnam, China, and 
the Soviet Union had made for solidarity in Asean. After the collapse of 
communism, Asean needed a new common objective that could unite the 
group. By their fourth summit in Singapore in January 1992, Asean 
countries were ready to promote a free trade area. Singapore had long 
urged a greater emphasis on economic cooperation to supplement politi-
Asean-Unpromisi ng Start, Promising Future 341 
cal cooperation. Our efforts had not been successful. Suggestions from 
Singapore for greater economic cooperation were regarded with suspicion 
by other Asean countries. As we had a more advanced economy, open to 
the world and almost totally free of both tariff and nontariff barriers, they 
feared that we would benefit disproportionately . 
In the late 1980s, after China and later India opened up and attracted 
huge investments, Asean leaders changed their views. The prime minister 
of Thailand in 1992, Anand Panyarachun, had been a successful business­
man after being head of the Thai foreign ministry. He understood the eco­
nomics of trade and investment in an interdependent world. To avoid lin­
gering suspicions about Singapore's motives, I advised Prime Minister 
Goh to get Anand to take the lead to push for an Asean Free-Trade Area 
(AFTA). Anand did so successful ly, and the Asean summit in Singapore 
agreed to establish AFTA by 2008. The date was later brought forward to 
2003 by the Asean economic ministers. 
AFTA marked a major milestone in Asean's evolution. Asean's goal was 
to manage relationships between members who still jealously guarded their 
sovereignty , and to help resolve political problems before they erupted into 
conflict. AFTA will lead to a greater integration of the economies of South­
east Asia. 
At the 1992 summit in Singapore, Asean leaders decided that its 
annual postministerial conferences should be a forum for political and 
security matters. This led to annual meetings of the Asean Regional 
Forum (ARF) with Asean's dialogue partners (the United States, Japan, 
Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Republic of Korea, and the European 
Union) together with China, Russia, and India. It enabled potential 
adversaries to discuss in a noncombative atmosphere sensitive disputes 
like the competing claims to the Spratly islets. It was a change in policy 
from excluding to including major powers to discuss security issues in the 
region. 
Meanwhile, Asean has to digest its enlarged membership. Vietnam 
was admitted into Asean in 1995, Myanmar and Laos in 1997, and 
Cambodia in 1999. The four have some way to go to reach the level of 
development of the old members, and to gain acceptability as dialogue 
partners of the United States and the European Union. 
21. East Asia in Crisis 1997-1999 
The sudden devastation to the economies of Asean in 1997 set back 
its standing and its capability to play an international role. Indonesia's 
President Suharto, who had built up his country and gained stature and 
recognition, was deposed. Prime Minister Mahathir of Malaysia was 
diminished by the Western media headlining his denunciations against 
currency speculators and Jews like George Soros. Thailand's Prime Minister 
Chuan Leekpai needed time to establish his international standing. What 
happened? 
In March 1997, Richard Hu, our finance minister, told the cabinet 
that the Thais had asked us to defend their baht, which was under attack. 
We were unanimous that we should not. Nevertheless, the Thais asked 
him to do it for them with their funds. They did not want the market to 
know that only the Thai central bank was buying bahts. The Monetary 
Authority of Singapore did so, but warned that it would not be successful. 
When the attackers were repelled, the Thais thought we were proved 
wrong. We warned them that the attackers would return. They did, in 
May. By 2 July, after spending over US$23 billion of Thailand's reserves, 
the Thai central banker gave up. He floated the baht, whereupon it 
dropped by 15 percent. Thai debtors scrambled to buy dollars, driving 
the baht further down. We did not realize then that the meltdown in East 
Asia had been triggered. 
Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines had their curren­
cies closely linked to the U.S. dollar. Interest rates on the U.S. dollar were 
344 From Third World to First 
much lower than their domestic interest rates. It worked well when the 
U.S. dollar was weakening and their exports became cheaper and increased. 
When the U.S. dollar began to strengthen from mid-1995, Thai exports 
became dearer and declined. Thailand's companies had borrowed in U.S. 
dollars, assuming that their exchange rates would remain more or less the 
same when the time came to repay. If they had floating exchange rates, they 
would have weighed the risk of a possible depreciation of the baht against 
the benefit of a lower interest rate. And foreign lenders would not have 
been so confident about the borrowers' ability to repay if faced with sud­
den changes in exchange rates. 
Several Singapore-based American bankers had discussed with me in 
1996 their advice to Thai and other Asean central bankers on the hazards 
of trying to control both their exchange and interest rates when they no 
longer had restrictions on capital flows. They had recommended more 
flexible exchange rates. The central bankers did not heed this warning 
and their current account deficits increased. 
Since 1995, the Thais had been having large current account deficits, 
importing more than they were exporting. If this continued, they would 
not have enough foreign currency to meet their foreign debt repayments. 
So, foreign exchange dealers began selling baht, anticipating the difficul­
ties the Thai central bank would face defending the baht at its then high 
rate of exchange to the U.S. dollar. Once the short-sellers started to win, 
reputable fund managers joined them in selling down the currencies of 
Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines as well as Thailand. All these 
currencies sank in value when their central banks abandoned their pegs to 
the U.S. dollar. 
The Singapore dollar, however, was not tied to the U.S. dollar but was 
managed against a basket of currencies of our major trading partners. It 
had steadily appreciated against the U.S. dollar until the mid-1990s. 
Singapore dollar interest rates were much lower than U.S. dollar rates. 
Because it was unattractive for Singapore companies to borrow U.S. dol­
lars, Singapore companies had little U.S. dollar debt. 
Thai Prime Minister Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, an old friend of mine 
from the time he was a general of the Thai army, asked Prime Minister 
Goh Chok Tong for a loan of US$1 billion. Goh discussed this in cabinet 
East Asia in Crisis 1997- 1999 345 
and decided that we would agree if Thailand first sought the assistance of 
the International Monetary Fund. It did. 
As the crisis spread, in July, Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir 
denounced George Soros as the speculacor responsible. Then Bank Negara 
Malaysia announced changes limiting the amount of Malaysian ringgit 
that could be swapped into foreign currencies. To check the fall in share 
prices, the Kuala Lumpur Srock Exchange changed its rules by requiring 
sellers to produce the physical share scrips within a day of any sale. They 
also imposed trading curbs on 100 key blue-chip stacks included in the 
stack exchange index computation. Fund managers dumped Malaysian 
and Asean currencies and stocks. 
In September 1997, at an IMF/World Bank meeting of international 
bankers in Hong Kong, Mahathir said, "Currency trading is unnecessary, 
unproductive and cotally immoral. It should be scopped. It should be made 
illegal." Another sellout of all Asean currencies and stocks followed. 
Thailand and Indonesia accepted IMF rescue packages with condi­
tions. But the Thais, after reaching agreement with the IMF in August 
1997, did not implement the terms they had agreed upon: to tighten 
money supply, raise interest rates, and clean up their banking system, 
including closing down 58 insolvent finance companies. Chavalit's multi­
party coalition government did not have the strength to undertake such 
painful reforms. Political leaders of all Thai parties both in government 
and opposition had close ties with bankers and businesspeople whose sup­
port they needed for fund-raising. In November, he lost a vote of confi­
dence and resigned. In Bangkok in January 1998, he explained to me that 
many Thai bankers had urged him to defend the baht, that as he was a 
soldier, not an expert on finance matters, he had taken their advice. His 
banker friends might not have told him that they had borrowed over $40 
billion in U.S. dollars and did not want to pay more bahts for the dollars 
they had borrowed. 
In retrospect, what had they done wrong? By the early 1990s, the 
economies of Thailand, Indonesia, and Korea were already operating at 
full capacity. Many of the new investments were channelled into projects 
of doubtful value. While the euphoria lasted, everyone overlooked the 
institutional and structural weaknesses in these economies. 
346 From Third World to First 
These countries would have been better off if their capital accounts 
had been liberalized more gradually. They would have had the time to 
build a system to monitor, check, and control the flow of non-FDI (for­
eign direct investment) capital to ensure that it went into productive 
investments. As it was, large amounts of capital were invested in stocks 
and properties, office blocks, and condominiums. These stocks and prop­
erties were in turn used as collateral for borrowing, further inflating the 
asset bubble. Lenders were aware of this laxness but accepted it as the way 
business was done in emerging markets. Some even saw the presence of 
politically connected business partners as implicit government guarantees 
for the loans and so went along with the game. 
The G7 finance ministers had pressed them to liberalize their finan­
cial markets and free capital movements. But they did not explain to the 
central bankers and finance ministers of the developing countries the dan­
gers inherent in today's globalized financial markets, when massive 
amounts can flow in or out at the touch of a computer button. Liberal­
ization should have been more carefully calibrated according to the level 
of competence and sophistication of their financial systems. These coun­
tries should have installed circuit breakers--controls to cope with any 
sudden inflow or outflow of funds. 
Although the economic conditions of each country were different, the 
collapse of foreign confidence affected the whole region. What began as a 
classic market mania with funds flowing exuberantly into East Asia 
became a classic market panic when investors stampeded to get their 
money out. 
In January 1997, Hanbo, a South Korean chaebol (Korean conglomerate) 
went bankrupt in a major corruption scandal involving President Kim 
Young Sam's son. Many other banks and chaebols were believed to be in 
similar straits and the value of the South Korean won dropped. The 
Korean central bank defended its currency until it ran out of reserves in 
November and sought IMF help. In the next few weeks, the whole of East 
Asia, including Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taiwan, was swept up in a 
financial typhoon. 
East Asia in Crisis 1997-1999 347 
Hong Kong's currency had been pegged to the U.S. dollar since 1983. 
Because of the crisis, it had to raise its interest rates well above that of the 
U.S. dollar, as a risk premium to induce people to hold HK dollars. High 
interest rates had hurt stock and property markets. Hong Kong lost its 
competitiveness because the cheaper currencies of its neighbors hurt its 
tourist and travel industries, leaving hotels empty. Hong Kong was right 
to defend the peg during this crisis to maintain confidence in the territory 
so soon after its return to Chinese sovereignty, but the problem became 
acute when the crisis was prolonged. 
What distinguishes East Asia's economic crisis from Latin America's 
underscores a basic difference in culture and social values. Unlike Latin 
Americans, East Asian governments had not overspent. Not all had 
indulged in extravagant prestige projects, or siphoned borrowed money 
out of their countries to park in the stock markets of New York or 
London. These governments had balanced budgets, low inflation, and 
many decades of steady high growth. It was their private sector corpora­
tions that had overborrowed short-term in the last few years to make 
imprudent long-term investments in properties and excess industrial 
plants. 
Western critics have attributed this collapse to what they term "Asian 
values": cronyism, guanxi, corruption, backdoor or under-the-counter busi­
ness practices. There is no question that these contributed to the crisis and 
aggravated the damage incurred. But were they the primary causes? The 
answer must be "no" because these flaws had been present, almost endemic, 
since the beginning of the "Asian miracle" in the 1960s, more than 30 years 
ago. It was only in the last few years that several of the emerging countries 
indulged in the excessive borrowing in foreign currencies that caused their 
troubles. Even excessive borrowings might not have led to such a meltdown 
but for their woefully inadequate systems with weak banks, inadequate 
supervision, and wrong exchange rate policies. Bad cultural habits aggra­
vated the damage; wrongdoings were difficult to detect and expose where 
systems were not transparent. 
Corruption, nepotism, and cronyism in Asia were condemned by the 
Western critics as proof of the fundamental weakness of "Asian values." 
There are many different value systems in Asia-Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist, 
348 From Third World to First 
Confucianist. I am able to discuss only Confucian values. Corruption and 
nepotism are a debasement of Confucian values. A Confucian gentleman's 
duty to family and friends presumes that he helps them from his personal 
and not official resources. Too often officials use public office to do favors for 
family and friends, undermining the integrity of government. Where there 
are transparent systems to detect and check abuses of power and privilege, as 
in Singapore and Hong Kong (both former British colonies), such abuses are 
rare. Singapore weathered the crisis better because no corruption or cronyism 
distorts the allocation of resources, and public officers are referees, not mar­
ket participants. But in the troubled countries, too many politicians and 
public officials have exercised power and responsibility not as a trust for 
public good, but as an opportunity for private gain. Making the problems 
worse, many political leaders and their officials refused to accept the mar­
ket's verdict. For a long time they blamed speculators and conspirators for 
the destruction in values. Their denial made many investors pull out. 
None of the leaders realized the implications of the globalized finan­
cial market of instant communications between the main financial centers 
of the world-New York, London, and Tokyo-and their representatives 
in the capitals of East Asia. The inflow of funds from the industrial coun­
tries brings not only the benefits of high growth but also the risk of a sud­
den outflow of these funds. Every capital-Bangkok, Jakarta, Kuala 
Lumpur, Seoul-has hundreds of resident international bankers sup­
ported by local staff with roots in the communi ty. Any wrong step by the 
government is instantly analyzed and reported to their clients worldwide. 
But Suharto acted as if it was still the 1960s, when financial markets were 
more insulated and reaction time much slower. 
Was the Asian miracle in fact a mirage? For several decades before 
companies in the region borrowed from international banks, these coun­
tries had high growth rates, low inflation, and prudent budgets. Back­
ward agricultural communities had maintained stability, accumulated 
savings, and attracted investments from the developed countries. Their 
peoples are hardworking and frugal, with high savings of 30 to 40 per­
cent. They invested in infrastructure. They concentrated on education and 
training. They have enterprising businesspeople, and pragmatic and pro­
business governments. Their economic fundamentals have been consis-
East Asia in Crisis 1997-1999 349 
tently good. By 1999, after two years of crisis, recovery appeared to be on 
the way. High savings kept interest rates low and made for an early 
rebound. Foreign fund managers became optimisti c and returned to the 
stock markets, boosting exchange rates. This may make some countries 
slow down their banking and corporate restructuring, which would be 
costly in a future downturn. 
All leaders in Southeast Asia were shell-shocked by the sudden devas­
tation of their currencies, stock markets, and property values. It will take 
some time to put their countries in order. This will happen, and the need 
to collaborate to increase the weight of Southeast Asian countries when 
negotiating with big powers like China, Japan, and the United States will 
bring them closer together in Asean. U.S. and European leaders will con­
tinue to be sympathetic and to sound helpful but their previous respect 
for the proven competence of the region's leaders will take some time to 
return. 
Asean leaders will learn from this setback to build stronger financial 
and banking systems, with sound regulations and rigorous supervision. 
Investors will return because the factors for high growth will remain for 
another 10 to 20 years. Cronyism and corruption will be difficult to erase 
completely , but with adequate laws and supervision, excesses can be 
checked. Another meltdown is unlikely as long as the pain and misery of 
this crisis are not forgotten. Within a decade, the original five Asean 
countries will resume their growth, and from a leaner base new leaders 
will emerge who will gain stature and respect. 
There is a deeper lesson to be drawn from this crisis. In a globalized 
economy, where Americans and Europeans set the rules through the 
WTO and other multilateral organizations, it is wasteful to use capital 
without regard to market forces, as the Japanese and Koreans have done. 
To finance the Japanese zaibatsus and the Korean chaebols in their expan­
sion to capture market share abroad, their governments extracted the 
maximum of savings from their people. The savings were directed by the 
government through their banks for specific conglomerates to capture 
market share in designated products. This has often resulted in uncom­
petitive industries. When they were catching up with the advanced coun­
tries, it was possible to spot which industries to invest in. Now that they 
350 From Third World to First 
have caught up with the West, it is not easy to pick the winners. Like 
everyone else, they will have to allocate resources in response to market 
signals. It is a mistake to think that the Japanese and Koreans have lost 
their innate strengths. Judging from their past records, they will restruc­
ture and learn to operate on the basis of profitability and rates of return on 
equity. 
22. Inside the Common wealth Club 
When we became independent I assumed that Singapore would be a 
member of the Commonwealth. The British government was supportive, 
and the Tunku was keen to sponsor us. I did not know that Pakistan had 
initially opposed our admission; it had considered Malaysia too pro-India 
in the India-Pakistan conflict over Kashmir. Arnold Smith, the secretary­
general of the Commonwealth, in his memoirs wrote that Pakistan's 
antagonism against Malaysia was carried over to the Singapore govern­
ment, which had shown sympathy for India. But Smith persuaded 
Pakistan to abstain and not object to Singapore's admission. In October 
1965, Singapore was admitted as the 22nd member of the Common­
wealth. This membership was valuable. For a newly independent country, 
it provided links to a network of governments whose institutions were 
similar and whose leaders and officials shared a common background. 
They were all English-speaking governments, with British civil adminis­
tration practices and legal, judicial, and educational systems. 
Soon after we joined, the prime minister of Nigeria, Sir Abubakar 
Tafawa Balewa, called a conference of Commonwealth prime ministers for 
11 January 1966 in Lagos, to discuss Rhodesia's Unilateral Declaration of 
Independence (UDI). Rhodesia was then a self-governing colony with a 
white minority of 225,000 in control of 4 million black Africans. I 
decided to go. 
On the BOAC (British Overseas Airways Corporation) plane making 
the seven-hour flight from London to Lagos were several other prime minis-
352 From Third World to First 
ters and presidents of the smaller Commonwealth countries. We made con­
versation. A memorable fellow passenger was Archbishop Makarios, presi­
dent of Cyprus. He wore silken black robes with a tall black hat as arch­
bishop of the Greek Orthodox Church. Once on board, he removed his robes 
and hat and looked a totally different person, a smallish bald man with a 
moustache and a mass of a beard. He sat across the aisle from me, so I had a 
good view of him. I watched, fascinated, as he dressed and tidied up when 
the plane taxied to the terminal. He diligently and carefully combed his 
moustache and beard. He stood up to put on his black robes over his white 
clothes, then his gold chain with a big medallion, and then carefully placed 
his hat on his head. An aide brushed him down to remove any white flecks 
from his flowing black robes, and handed him his archbishop's staff; only 
then was His Beatitude Archbishop Makarios finally ready to descend the 
steps in proper style for the waiting cameras. No politician could have been 
more PR-conscious. The other prime ministers held back and allowed him 
to take precedence-he was not only president, he was also archbishop. 
We were greeted, inspected a guard of honor in turn, and then 
whisked into Lagos. It looked like a city under siege. Police and soldiers 
lined the route to the Federal Palace Hotel. Barbed wire and troops sur­
rounded it. No leader left the hotel throughout the two-day conference. 
The night before the meeting, Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, whom I 
had visited two years before, gave us a banquet in the hotel. Raja and I 
were seated opposite a hefty Nigerian, Chief Festus, their finance minis­
ter. The conversation is still fresh in my mind. He was going to retire 
soon, he said. He had done enough for his country and now had to look 
after his business, a shoe factory. As finance minister, he had imposed a 
tax on imported shoes so that Nigeria could make shoes. Raja and I were 
incredulous. Chief Festus had a good appetite that showed in his rotund 
figure, elegantly camouflaged in colorful Nigerian robes with gold orna­
mentation and a splendid cap. I went to bed that night convinced that 
they were a different people playing to a different set of rules. 
When the meeting opened on 11 January, Prime Minister Abubakar 
spoke. He was a tall, lean, and dignified figure with a slow, measured 
delivery. He looked every inch a chief, a figure of quiet authority , in the 
flowing robes of the Hausas from northern Nigeria. He had summoned 
this conference urgently to discuss the unlawful declaration of indepen-
Inside the Commonwealth Club 353 
dence by Rhodesia, which called for action from the British. The vice 
president of Zambia, Reuben Kamanga, spoke next, and then Harold 
Wilson. It was clear Wilson was not able and not going to use force 
against Ian Smith's illegal independent regime. It would be politicall y 
costly in British popular support, and would also cause economic damage 
to Rhodesia and the surrounding African countries. 
On the second day I spoke. I had no prepared script, just a few head­
ings and notes I had jotted down as Prime Minister Abubakar and the 
others spoke. I took a broad philosophical approach. Three hundred years 
ago, the British set out to occupy North America, Australia, and New 
Zealand and to colonize much of Asia and Africa. They settled in the 
more desirable regions of Asia and Africa as conquerors and masters. But 
in 1966, a British prime minister was talking on equal terms with heads 
of government of former colonial territories. It was a continually evolving 
relationship. Sir Albert Margai, prime minister of Sierra Leone, had said 
that only an African could feel passionately and be concerned about 
Rhodesia. I could not agree with him that only Africans should be con­
cerned with this problem. We were all interested parties and concerned. 
Singapore was closely associated with Britain in defense. If Britain were to 
be branded as a supporter of Ian Smith's illegal seizure of power, my posi­
tion would become difficult. 
I disagreed with Dr. Milton Obote, prime minister of Uganda, that 
Britain had been reluctant to bring the Europeans in Rhodesia to heel or 
to have the UN impose sanctions because of a diabolical British plot to 
give Ian Smith time to consolidate his regime. It was unhelpful to talk in 
terms of racist divisions between white settlers and immigrants. Like the 
peoples in Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, I was a settler. If all 
immigrants were racists, then the world was in for a difficult time. We 
had two alternative solutions to problems created by migrations that had 
taken place all around the world: either to accept that all men had equal 
rights, or to return to the rule of the strong over the weak. For colored 
peoples of the world to demand retribution for past wrongs was not the 
answer to survival. In Africa, the nub of the problem was not Rhodesia 
but race relations in South Africa. 
I did not believe that Britain was reluctant to end the Smith regime 
because its survival would threaten the standing of the West with all 
354 From Third World to First 
non-European peoples. Wilson was faced with the problem of going 
against domestic opinion if he used force to crush a puny minority. I 
believed the British government was in earnest and its reluctance to bring 
the issue to the United Nations was because it did not want 130 members 
of the UN to decide what happened in Rhodesia after Mr. Smith had been 
brought down. Britain had to buy time for its economic interests in South 
Africa and Rhodesia and there was the need to preserve the Rhodesian 
economy in the interests of Africans as well as Europeans. When the prob­
lems of South Africa were resolved, the wider problem remained of how 
different races could learn to live together in a world shrunk by techno­
logical changes. 
I sympathized with the Africans, but I also saw the difficulties a 
British prime minister faced if he had to send British troops to quell a 
rebellion of British settlers who had been fully self-governing for decades 
since 1923. The issue now was to make progress on the method and the 
time for achieving majority rule for Rhodesia. 
One advantage of these Commonwealth leaders' meetings was that 
however big or small your country, when you did intervene, you were 
judged on your merits. Many read prepared speeches. I responded to what 
had just been said, and from notes. I spoke sincerely and expressed my 
thoughts without the euphemisms of a prepared text. This was my maiden 
speech at a Commonwealth prime ministers' conference and I could sense 
that my colleagues around the table responded favorably. 
Wilson later wrote in his memoirs that "It was hard-hitting, though 
somewhat repetitive, as one African leader after another sought to prove 
how much more African he was than his neighbour. From Asia, Cyprus, 
the Caribbean, the message of condemnation was the same. Then Lee 
Kuan Yew of Singapore spoke-an off-the-cuff unprepared speech of some 
forty minutes at a level of sophistication rarely achieved in any of the 
Commonwealth conferences which I attended. " 
My attendance at Lagos consolidated my friendship with Harold 
Wilson. I had been helpful to the Africans and not unhelpful to the 
British. Wilson congratulated me outside the conference room and said he 
hoped I would attend other Commonwealth conferences. He needed a foil 
for difficult leaders who made long and biting speeches. The conference 
ended two days later after appointing two committees to review the effect 
Inside the Commonwe alth Club 355 
of sanctions and the special needs of Zambia that required Common­
wealth support. 
When we left for our next stop, Accra, the capital of Ghana, there was 
more security along the route to the airport as tension had increased in 
Lagos in the four days since we arrived. 
Three days after we arrived in Accra, we were told by our hosts that 
there had been a bloody coup in Lagos. Prime Minister Abubakar had 
been assassinated and so had Chief Festus. An Ibo army major from east­
ern Nigeria, where oil was being discovered, led the coup which killed 
many Hausa Muslims from northern Nigeria. The major said "he wanted 
to get rid of rotten and corrupt ministers and political parties." This coup 
put Major-General J. T. U. Aguiyi-Irons into power, but it was to be fol­
lowed by many other coups. 
Kwame Nkrumah, Ghana's president, did not rejoice at the news. He 
himself had had a narrow escape about two years before, just before I vis­
ited him in January 1964. By 1966, "Osagyefo " (Redeemer), as Nkrumah 
was called, had recovered enough of his bounce to give me dinner with 
some of his senior ministers and a bright young vice-chancellor of his uni­
versity. This man, Abraham, was only about 30 years old, had taken a 
First in Classics at Oxford and was a fellow of All Souls' College. Nkrumah 
was very proud of him. I was impressed, but wondered why a country so 
dependent on agriculture should have its brightest and best do Classics­
Latin and Greek. 
On our arrival at Accra, the person who came up to the aircraft to 
greet me was Krobo Edusei, the minister for presidential affairs. He had 
gained notoriety as a corrupt minister who had bought himself a golden 
bedstead, a story much publicized in the world press. Nkrumah defused 
the scandal by restricting Krobo's portfolio to looking after government 
hospitality . On my second night in Accra, he took me to a nightclub in 
Accra. He proudly announced that he was the owner and that all VIPs 
would enjoy their evenings there. 
We travelled by car to the High Volta dam, some three hours of 
travel. On the road to the dam our convoy was led by a car with loud­
speakers playing music with an African beat; the lyrics had the refrain, in 
English, "work is beautiful." Little toddlers would appear from their huts 
off the road, swaying naturally to the rhythm as they made their way to 
356 From Third World to First 
the roadside to wave to us. I was fascinated to see how lithe and double­
jointed they were. 
I was the second guest to be entertained on a beautiful yacht that had 
been imported fully assembled from Miami. They told me it had been 
transported by rail and floated on the lake. Accompanying us on board 
were Krobo Edusei and Ghana's minister for foreign affairs, Alex Quaison 
Sackey, a well-educated and well-spoken man. When we were cruising on 
the lake, having cocktails and canapes on deck, Raja asked Krobo who 
had made his beautiful safari suit. Krobo replied, "My tailor shop in 
Kumasi. You must visit it one day and I will make a suit for you like 
mine." He then spoke of his other activities. He used to be a 30 bob 
(US$4) a week postal clerk; now he had two sons educated in Geneva, 
Switzerland. A man, he said, must have ambition. Quaison Sackey, a 
sophisticate who had been president of the UN General Assembly , looked 
most unhappy and uncomfortable. He valiantly tried to steer the conver­
sation away from Krobo, but Krobo was not to be deterred and we were 
regaled with one hilarious tale after another. I wondered what would hap­
pen to these two countries. They were then the brightest hopes of Africa, 
the first two to get their independence, Ghana in 195 7, followed shortly 
by Nigeria. 
One month later, on 24 February, as Nkrumah was being welcomed 
with a 21-gun salute in Beijing, China, an army coup took place in Accra. 
People danced in the streets as the army leaders arrested leading members 
of Nkrumah's government. Alex Quaison Sackey and Krobo Edusei were 
with Nkrumah in Beijing. When they returned to Accra, they were 
placed under protective custody. My fears for the people of Ghana were 
not misplaced. Notwithstanding their rich cocoa plantations, gold mines, 
and High Volta dam, which could generate enormous amounts of power, 
Ghana's economy sank into disrepair and has not recovered the early 
promise it held out at independence in 1957. 
The news I read saddened me. I never visited Ghana again. Two 
decades later, in the 1980s, Quaison Sackey saw me in Singapore. He had 
been arrested and released in one of the innumerable coups. He wanted to 
purchase palm oil on credit from Singapore, on behalf of the Nigerian gov­
ernment, which promised to pay after they had held their elections. I said 
that was a private business deal he had to strike. He picked up a living 
Inside the Common wealth Club 357 
by using his contacts with African leaders of neighboring states. Ghana, 
he said, was in a mess. I asked after the bright young vice-chancellor, 
Abraham. Quaison Sackey reported that he had entered a monastery in 
California. I felt sad. If their brightest and best gave up the fight and 
sought refuge in a monastery, not in Africa but in California, the road to 
recovery would be long and difficult. 
I was not optimistic about Africa. In less than 10 years after indepen­
dence in 1957, Nigeria had had a coup and Ghana a failed coup. I 
thought their tribal loyalties were stronger than their sense of common 
nationhood. This was especially so in Nigeria, where there was a deep 
cleavage between the Muslim Hausa northerners and the Christian and 
pagan southerners. As in Malaysia, the British had handed power, espe­
cially the army and police, to the Muslims. In Ghana, without this north­
south divide, the problem was less acute, but there were still clear tribal 
divisions. Unlike India, Ghana did not have long years of training and 
tutelage in the methods and discipline of modern government. 
The next conference was in London in September 1966, when I got to 
know many prime ministers who had not attended the special conference 
in Lagos. In the two weeks there, I consolidated Singapore's position with 
the British public and maintained my already good relations with Wilson 
and his key ministers, and with Conservative party leaders. 
The Rhodesia question again dominated the whole conference (as it 
did every conference until its settlement in 1979 at the Lusaka meeting). 
African leaders felt strongly for their fellow Africans in Rhodesia. They 
also wanted to establish their African credentials with their own people. 
Moreover, focusing on the Unilateral Declaration of Independence (UDI) 
in Rhodesia took their people's minds off their own urgent economic and 
social difficulties. Of the white leaders, Lester Pearson of Canada was by 
far the most liberal in his instincts and sympathetic to the cause of the 
Africans and the underprivileged. 
I spoke of the problems in Southeast Asia. I said that Vietnam was a 
clash of two rival ideologies, each determined not to give in, knowing 
that the whole region would be lost if one side yielded to the other. 
Harold Holt, the Australian prime minister, showed discomfort when I 
358 From Third World to First 
said Australian and New Zealand armies were in South Vietnam not 
purely to safeguard democracy and Vietnamese freedom: They were 
defending their own strategic interests. He quickly recovered his balance 
and accepted my point when I added that their interests included my sur­
vival. I took an independent position to establish my credentials so as not 
to be seen as a puppet of the British, Australians, or New Zealanders 
whose troops were defending Singapore. I said frankly that an American 
withdrawal would be disastrous for all in the region, including Singapore. 
My language made my views acceptable, although the prevailing senti­
ments of African leaders were against American intervention. Singapore's 
standing with Africans and Asian leaders also improved. 
At the next meeting, in January 1969, also in London, Wilson as 
chairman asked me to open the discussion on Commonwealth coopera­
tion. I prefaced my remarks with a criticism of niggardly Western help 
for developing countries, then went on to explain the deeper reasons for 
their failure. To rally their people in their quest for freedom, the first­
generation anticolonial nationalist leaders had held out visions of prosper­
ity that they could not realize. A population explosion had increased the 
burden on resources. lnterethnic peace, which had been enforced by the 
colonial overlord, was difficult to maintain after independence with 
power in the hands of an ethnic majority. The elite who had commanded 
popular support before independence had to demonstrate their continu­
ing legitimac y, and in competing against other parties, they had been 
unable to resist the temptation of appeals to ethnic, linguistic, and reli­
gious loyalties. The countries suffered as their ethnic minorities, mostly 
Indians in Africa, were squeezed out by rioting or legislation. Often they 
were the shopkeepers who had acted as village bankers, since they knew 
who was and who was not creditworthy. This role of village banker could 
not be filled by their own native administrators, the U.S. Peace Corps, or 
British Voluntary Service officers. The layer of trained people was too thin 
and new states reverted back to type as soft societies without the firm 
hand of an overlord and a strong framework of administration. Corruption 
set in and became a way of life. Military coups made things worse. But 
most of all, most governments had favored economic planning and con­
trols which stifled free enterprise. Fortunately, Malaysia and Singapore 
had not and so continued to make progress. In his book The Labour 
Inside the Commonwe alth Club 359 
Government 1964-1970, Harold Wilson wrote that I described "with bru­
tal realism the economic problems of newly-emancipated countries .... 
By common consent, one of the most remarkable essays in interpretation 
of the post-imperial world any one of us had heard." 
Wilson had proposed to alternate the biennial conferences between 
London and a Commonwealth country. He was keen to hold the next one 
in Singapore. The other leaders agreed. I was happy to host it. It would be 
good for Singapore to have world attention focused on it. With two years 
to prepare, it could be an occasion for Singapore to gain recognition as an 
oasis of efficiency and rationality in the Third World. 
Our Commonwealth guests arrived in January 1971 to a clean and green 
Singapore with friendly, warm, efficient, and courteous service. The hotels, 
shops, taxis, and restaurants put forth their best efforts. All was neat and 
orderly. The families of the pro-communist political detainees staged an 
antigovernment demonstration outside the NTUC Conference Hall, where 
the meeting was being held. When the police quietly dispersed them, 
there were murmurs of disapproval from the British press, that we should 
have allowed them to carry on. The officers responsible for the delegates' 
security thought otherwise. 
Ted Heath had announced soon after he became prime minister that 
Britain would resume arms sales to South Africa which had been sus­
pended by the Labour government. This provoked a fierce reaction from 
black African leaders, many of whom threatened to break up the Common­
wealth if Britain persisted. Soon after Heath arrived in Singapore, he 
agreed with me and announced that Britain would be happy to have the 
arms for South Africa issue treated as a separate item on the agenda. After 
two sessions restricted to leaders only, we agreed to a study group to con­
sider the question of the supply of maritime arms and to report its findings 
to the secretary-general. 
Heath was not comfortable in that Third World multiracial setting. 
It was his first experience of such a gathering. The African leaders set out 
to make him feel isolated. A little shy and guarded, he was different from 
Harold Wilson with his pipe-puffing bonhomie. Heath appeared stiff and 
ill at ease, spoke with a strong Oxford accent, and bristled when pro-
360 From Third World to First 
voked. Fortunately, he knew me well and was confident that I would 
ensure him a fair hearing. 
I called on Sir Seretse Khama, president of Botswana, as the first 
speaker. I knew him to be moderate, level-headed, and thoughtful. He 
was the son of the chief of Botswana and had married an Englishwoman 
when he was at Oxford. The South African government had successfull y 
pressured the British government to block his succession to the chieftain­
ship for many years because his black-white marriage made a mockery of 
their ban on black-white sex. He said Britain must be the arbiter of its 
own national interest, but the decision to sell arms could only damage the 
Commonwealth. It was a quiet and cogent speech. 
Julius Nyerere, president of Tanzania, pitched his argument on a high 
moral plane, that South Africa was out of the Commonwealth because its 
ideology was inconsistent with a multiracial Commonwealth. He asked 
"earnestly" that Britain should not help South Africa and force African 
countries to react. He was unexpectedly brief. He had sized up Heath and 
decided it was best not to preach to him. Nyerere was the African leader I 
most respected. He struck me as honest and sincere. He handed over 
power to a successor in a constitutional manner and Tanzania never 
descended into the chaos of Uganda. 
President Hastings Banda of Malawi said no African leader was going 
to leave and wreck the Commonwealth. Force would not succeed; the 
freedom fighters had tried since 1964 and achieved nothing. In place of 
force, isolation, and boycott, he called for contact and dialogue between 
the blacks and whites. African leaders displayed open contempt for him, 
but he appeared completely unmoved. I tried to check his rhetorical exu­
berance but once in full flow he was not to be stopped. He was quite a 
character, with his sunglasses even indoors and at night, and his buxom 
young African lady companion. He looked old but spoke with vigor, wav­
ing his fly whisk to emphasize his points. But he might as well have 
waved a red flag at angry bulls. I was not sure whether Heath was embar­
rassed or delighted. 
Heath made a reasoned reply. The sale of maritime equipment to 
South Africa was essentially a matter of defense policy, nothing to do with 
apartheid. Britain depended on the free movement of goods and the free­
dom of the seas. Half its oil supplies and a quarter of its trade passed 
Inside the Commonwe alth Club 361 
through the sea route around the Cape. The Soviet Union posed a mar­
itime threat. (On 16 January, four days before Heath spoke on arms to 
South Africa, two Soviet warships, a cruiser and a destroyer, had ostenta­
tiously sailed past Singapore around two in the afternoon from the South 
China Sea toward the Indian Ocean.) 
A dramatic intervention was provided by President Kenneth Kaunda 
of Zambia. He warned that Britain's national interest lay not only in 
South Africa or the Indian Ocean, but in many parts of Africa. As he 
recounted cruelties Africans had suffered at the hands of white settlers, he 
suddenly sobbed and pressed his eyes with a white handkerchief held at 
one corner by his fingers. Those who saw this for the first time found it a 
moving experience. But he was to repeat it frequently, at almost every 
Commonwealth meeting whenever the subject of white domination over 
Africans came up. It became a familiar music hall act. 
Uganda's president, Milton Obote, was different from Kaunda or 
Nyerere. There was deep hatred and venom when he spoke on Rhodesia, 
Namibia, and South Africa. I felt something sinister in his expression and 
the glint in his eyes. During a conference break, Obote was told that 
General Idi Amin had taken over his country in a coup. He looked 
dejected. His predicament underlined the precariousness of so many 
African governments. 
The last speaker on South Africa was the prime minister of Fiji, Ratu 
Sir Kamisese Mara. A strapping, handsome six-foot-six , he looked the 
rugby player he was. It was unrealistic to expect the British prime minis­
ter to state that his government would not now sell arms to South Africa. 
To stop the sale of arms was like peeling off the outer skin of the onion. 
The next skin would be the sale of arms by the French, then by the 
Italians. On that reasonable note, we adjourned at 4:00 A.M. 
I remembered how the communists in the trade unions would keep 
me sitting for long hours on hard wooden backless benches. Then, after 
all my exhausted noncommunist supporters had left and we were in the 
minority, they would take the vote. The Commonwealth leaders were 
seated in comfortable armchairs, but the thermostat was malfunctioning 
and the air-conditioning was too cold in the early hours of the morning. 
To adjourn would mean everybody getting renewed energy, building up 
more steam for ever longer speeches. I decided to carry on and everyone 
362 From Third World to First 
stayed. All speakers from Africa had the satisfaction of being heard; no 
leader was stopped from saying his piece meant for home consumption. 
When discussions resumed a few hours later "on the security of the 
Indian Ocean," the African leaders were all absent and the work was soon 
done. Except for a few brief quiet periods when I got some other prime 
minister to take the chair, I had to sit through all 13 sessions from 14 
January to 22 January. It was punishing to have to listen to repetitious 
speeches made at a tangent to each other. Since then, I have sympathized 
with those who chaired international conferences where delegates come 
with prepared speeches, determined to say their piece regardless of what 
had already been said. 
Although the conference did cover all items on the agenda, the press 
concentrated mainly on the controversy over arms for South Africa. 
Privately, over drinks, Heath expressed his disappointment at the 
public airing of many confidential or secret exchanges between heads of 
government. Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau agreed, regretting 
that the African leaders tended to adopt UN diplomatese. I said this was 
inevitable when Third World leaders were influencing each other at 
so many international conferences where rhetoric and hyperbole were 
standard fare. I added that all first-generation independence leaders were 
charismatic speakers, but their administrations seldom followed up with 
the implementation. 
As chairman, I gained insights into the backstage operations of a 
Commonwealth conference. It was the informal, bilateral, and small cau­
cus sessions between key leaders that determined the outcome of the 
conference. Arnold Smith, who in 1962 had given me dinner in Moscow 
when he was Canada's ambassador, had been secretary-general of the 
Commonwealth for more than five years. He had intimate knowledge of 
the personalities and positions of the leaders attending. Together we told 
the African leaders privately that they could never expect Ted Heath to 
climb down publicly. We convened two sessions, restricted to leaders, to 
endorse compromises Smith had brokered. The formal resolutions in the 
full conference were settled at these smaller meetings. At the end of the 
meeting, after all the histrionics, the secretary-general got the Third 
World leaders to understand that the guts of the Commonwealth were in 
economic, social, and cultural cooperation, and that depended on funding 
Inside the Commonwealth Club 363 
mainly from the developed old Commonwealth-Britain, Canada, Aus­
tralia, and New Zealand. Commonwealth cooperation would end if the 
donors found the cost-benefit ratio unfavorable. With tact and skill, 
Smith persuaded the Africans and Asians not to push issues to the break­
ing point. Sonny Ramphal, the Guyanan foreign minister who took over 
from Smith in 1975, showed even greater skill in letting the Third World 
leaders have their rhetoric while he kept the road show going by making 
sure the cost-benefit equation kept the donors engaged. 
Rhodesia and apartheid occupied much time at every conference. For 
most of them, unless I looked up the minutes, I would not remember the 
issues of the day that agitated the leaders at that time. But I have carried 
unforgettable vignettes of meetings and conversations from each confer­
ence. At Ottawa in 1973, I remember the chairman, Prime Minister 
Pierre Trudeau, a French Canadian who was completely and expressively 
bilingual. He told me he had an Irish mother and a French father. 
Trudeau had a sharp mind and a sharp tongue to match. I watched his 
press conference with admiration. As he switched from English to French, 
his facial expressions and gestures became French. He was a truly bilin­
gual, bicultural Canadian. He had much sympathy for underdogs and was 
always willing to lend them a hand, but could be quite tough about cut­
ting Canadian scholarships for Singapore students once he decided we 
could afford to pay. 
Another person I remember from the Ottawa meeting was Prime 
Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, the hero who had opposed Pakistan 
and led East Pakistan to independence as Bangladesh. He arrived in style 
at Ottawa in his own aircraft. When I landed, I saw a parked Boeing 707 
with "Bangladesh " emblazoned on it. When I left, it was still standing on 
the same spot, idle for eight days, getting obsolescent without earning 
anything. As I left the hotel for the airport, two huge vans were being 
loaded with packages for the Bangladeshi aircraft. At the conference, 
Mujibur Rahman had made a pitch for aid to his country. Any public 
relations firm would have advised him not to leave his special aircraft 
standing for eight whole days on the parking apron. The fashion of the 
time was for leaders of the bigger Third World countries to travel in their 
364 From Third World to First 
own aircraft. All leaders were equal at the conference table, but those 
from heavyweight countries showed that they were more equal by arriv­
ing in big private jets, the British in their VC 10s and Comets, and the 
Canadians in Boeings. The Australians joined this select group in 1979, 
after Malcolm Fraser's government purchased a Boeing 707 for the Royal 
Australian Air Force. Those African presidents whose countries were then 
better off, like Kenya and Nigeria, also had special aircraft. I wondered 
why they did not set out to impress the world that they were poor and in 
dire need of assistance. Our permanent representative at the UN in New 
York explained that the poorer the country, the bigger the Cadillacs they 
hired for their leaders. So I made a virtue of arriving by ordinary commer­
cial aircraft, and thus helped preserve Singapore's Third World status for 
many years. However, by the mid-l 990s, the World Bank refused to heed 
our pleas not co reclassify us as a "High Income Developing Country," 
giving no Brownie points for my frugal travel habits. We lost all the con­
cessions that were given to developing countries. 
At Kingston, Jamaica, in April 1975, Prime Minister Michael 
Manley, a light-skinned West Indian, presided with panache and spoke 
with great eloquence. But I found his views quixotic. He advocated a 
"redistribution of the world's wealth." His country was a well-endowe d 
island of 2,000 square miles, with several mountains in the center, where 
coffee and other subtropical crops were grown. They had beautiful holiday 
resorts built by Americans as winter homes. Theirs was a relaxed culture. 
The people were full of song and dance, spoke eloquently, danced vigor­
ously, and drank copiously. Hard work they had left behind with slavery. 
One Sunday afternoon, when Choo and I walked out of the barbed 
wired enclosure around the hotels used for the conference to see the city 
on foot, a passing car came to a halt with the driver shouting, "Mr. Lee, 
Mr. Lee, wait for me." A Chinese Jamaican, speaking Caribbean English, 
came up. "You mustn't forget us. We are having a very difficult time." He 
gave me his card. He was a real estate agent. Many professionals and busi­
nesspeople had left for America and Canada and had given him their 
homes and offices to sell. He had seen me on Jamaican television and was 
anxious to speak to me. Chinese, Indians, and even black Jamaican profes­
sionals felt there was no future under the left-wing socialist government 
of Michael Manley. The policies of the government were ruinous. I asked 
Inside the Commonwealth Club 365 
what he was going to do. He was not a professional so he could not leave 
or he would. But when all these big houses had been sold and there was 
not much real estate business to do, he might yet go. I wished him luck 
and cut the meeting short. I noticed the black Jamaican security officers 
covering me turning aggressive in their body language. Thereafter, I read 
the news of Jamaica with greater understanding. 
To honor the queen's silver jubilee, we met in London in July 1977. It 
was a different relationship. Britain's economy was no longer as strong; 
indeed, Denis Healey had called in the IMF in 197 6 to help Britain out of 
some difficulty . I remember standing in line behind Archbishop Makarios 
of Cyprus as Choo and I waited to sign the visitors' book at 10 Downing 
Street, before going through the back garden to watch the queen's birth­
day parade. His Beatitude did not use the pen proffered by a British war­
rant officer. He took out his own pen, signed, and walked away. As I 
signed, I said to the soldier, "The Archbishop signed in red." "Red as his 
hands were bloody," replied the warrant officer who had served in Cyprus 
during those bloody years when the British army had to keep down the 
Cypriot nationalists who were determined to get the British out and have 
enosis (union) with Greece. 
In 1979, I made my third visit to Lusaka. The first, in 1964, was dur­
ing my African tour of 17 capitals, and the second in 1970, was for the 
Non-Aligned Summit. Since 1970, Zambia's economy had declined. We 
were entertained at State House, where I had stayed in 1964 as the house 
guest of the last governor. It had lost its bloom. There were fewer deer 
and exotic birds in the grounds, and the big house itself did not have that 
spick-and-span look of British colonial government houses. We were 
housed in the same chalets as in 1970, dotted around the conference hall 
which had been built for them by Yugoslavia, a fellow member of the 
Non-Aligned Movement. The conference hall and chalets had not been 
much used since 1970 and showed it, but had just been refurbished and 
furnished at great expense, with furniture flown in from Spain. 
The catering at the chalet where we stayed was a disaster. They had 
trained young students as cooks. Our cook's total repertoire was bacon 
and eggs or just soft-boiled eggs for breakfast, steak for lunch, and steak 
for dinner. There was plenty of liquor and wines, far more than we 
needed. 
366 From Third World to First 
Everything was in short supply. The shops were empty. Imported toi­
letries were absent and there was little by way of local substitutes. Choo 
saw women queuing for essentials. The only souvenir she could buy was a 
malachite egg, to remind us that Zambia was a single-commodity econ­
omy, copper, and its price had not kept up with the prices of oil and other 
imports. They had no foreign exchange, and their currency was rapidly 
depreciating. Prime Minister Kenneth Kaunda's major preoccupation was 
politics, black versus white politics, not the economics of growth for 
Zambia. He remained as president until the 1990s when, to his credit, he 
conducted a fair election and lost. After Kaunda left, the lot of Zambians 
did not improve much. 
My most memorable encounter at the Melbourne conference in 
October 1981 was with an Indian in the coffee room. We were the only 
two seeking refreshments. I asked if he was with the Indian delegation. 
No, he was the leader of the delegation for Uganda, representing Presi­
dent Milton Obote, who could not come. I was surprised (Indians had 
been persecuted by Idi Amin for a decade and had fled Uganda) and asked 
if he had returned to Uganda. No, his family had settled in London and 
he was the Ugandan High Commissioner in London. He had left during 
Idi Amin's rule. I asked what had happened to the Speaker of the 
Ugandan Parliament who in January 1964 had given me and my delega­
tion a reception at Parliament House, Kampala. He was a Sikh with a tur­
ban, proud of his stone-faced Parliament House. By coincidence, the for­
mer Speaker was coming to Melbourne to meet him the next day. He had 
been forced to leave Uganda and had settled in Darwin, where he became 
a magistrate. I was sad. Uganda could have done with more such people, 
and not just as Speakers, to give dynamism to the Ugandan economy as 
the Sikhs have done in many other countries, including Singapore. He 
had been a casualty of the 1971 coup when ldi Amin deposed Milton 
Obote while he was in Singapore. 
In Delhi two years later, I was seated next to Mrs. Obote at the 
queen's dinner. She gave me another facet of the Ugandan tragedy while 
recounting how in the 1971 coup she with her three children had escaped 
from Kampala to Nairobi. They were sent back. They escaped again and 
spent years in exile in Dar-es-Salaam. She returned to Uganda in 1980, a 
year after Idi Amin was deposed. Milton Obote, now president again, was 
Inside the Commonwealth Club 367 
a much sadder and more subdued man. I caught a glimpse of the magni­
tude of the Ugandan disaster from my conversation with his wife. She had 
discovered that the people had changed, no longer willing to work for 
what they needed. After nine years of brutalities, lawlessness, and vicious­
ness under Idi Amin, people simply grabbed what they wanted. They had 
lost all the habits that made for civilized living. I was to remember this 
when our police contingent in the UN force reported on their experiences 
in Cambodia in 1991-19 93. If anything, Cambodia was worse after 20 
years of chaos. 
That November 198 3, Margaret Thatcher discussed the question of 
Hong Kong. Deng Xiaoping had been adamant on Hong Kong's return. 
_She had tried to persuade him to allow an extension of the lease. He made 
it clear that that was completely unacceptable; China must resume sover­
eignty in 1997. What were my views? She had raised the matter because 
the governor had told her that Hong Kong leases in the New Territories 
were running out. I asked how far she was willing to go to press her view, 
given that the survival of a British Hong Kong depended upon China's 
attitude. She did not have a ready answer. I thought it unlikely the 
Chinese would agree to an extension of the lease as too much national 
prestige was at stake. In the case of Macau, the Portuguese simply carried 
on their administration without raising the matter with Beijing. She said 
the governor had told her he had no legal authority to extend the leases 
beyond 1997, so she had raised it. 
Before I left Delhi, I gave my view that she had few cards in her 
hands. The best course would be to put the ball in the Chinese court, to 
tell Deng that Hong Kong could survive and prosper only if China 
wanted it to. The colony of Hong Kong, the island itself, and Kowloon 
peninsula could not survive without the New Territories, which was on 
leasehold. Hence it was not practical to adopt the legal position that 
Britain could continue to hold the colony minus the New Territories; far 
better to get terms for Hong Kong that would enable it to continue to 
prosper as it was doing, but under China's flag. 
I had looked forward to the meeting in Nassau, Bahamas, in October 
1985. It was the playground of wealthy Americans. Then I read in the 
British papers how drugs had spread throughout the Bahamas, and vio­
lent crime was rampant. The London Sunday Times reported that Prime 
368 From Third World to First 
Minister Sir Lynden Pindling was involved. No libel action followed. For 
the queen's dinner on the royal yacht Britannia, Pindling offered all lead­
ers a boat ride from our hotels to the Britannia. I decided to go by road. 
Near the wharf where the royal yacht was berthed, we passed a crowd of 
demonstrators with placards denouncing Pindling; several said "Chief is a 
Thief." The chief and his other guests took much longer by boat than we 
did by car. Either because the sea was choppy or the boat was slow, they 
kept the queen waiting for over an hour. She was usually gracious and 
restrained in her comments, but was not accustomed to being kept wait­
ing. She said to me that the dishes would be overcooked. The main dish 
was, but the dessert was excellent. 
I had lunch one day with President Junius Jayewardene of Sri Lanka 
and the chief justice of the Bahamas. The chief justice spoke of the wide­
spread cocaine habit in the country and of the vast fortunes made by those 
in the drug network. Smugglers flew into the Bahamas from South 
America in small aircraft. With the connivance of customs and other offi­
cials, the drugs were taken by air and sea to the U.S. mainland. In transit, 
enough slipped through to the local population to ruin many a family. 
High government ministers had been involved. When I left Nassau, I had 
lost my last illusion of an island paradise anywhere in the world. 
My last conference was in Kuala Lumpur in October 1989. Like the pre­
vious meeting in Vancouver , October 1987, it was uneventful and there 
were no "hot" issues. I spent one long evening on Langkawi island, dur­
ing the "retreat" (an informal gathering of the conference members at 
some resort), chatting with Prime Minister Bhutto and her husband Asif 
Zadari, learning about Pakistani politics and culture. She had youthful 
good looks, a fair complexion, and a finely chiseled, photogenic face. He 
was an ebullient and outgoing wheeler-dealer, with no inhibitions in 
telling me that he was ready to consider any deal in anything--cutting a 
good deal was what life was about for him. He was in the fruit and other 
export business, in real estate and everything else. I promised to introduce 
him to some fruit importers to buy his mangoes, which I did when he vis­
ited Singapore accompanying his wife to some meeting in 1995. He was 
a likeable rogue. But I never thought him capable of murdering her 
Inside the Commonwealth Club 369 
brother, a charge made by the Pakistani government after she was thrown 
out of office by the president. 
That was my last Commonwealth conference as I was preparing to 
step down as prime minister in 1990. The first conference in 1962 was in 
a different age with a different set of leaders. The Commonwealth was 
then a relatively small club, with deep and strong bonds of history and 
kinship between Britain and the old dominions. They still had close eco­
nomic and political links with the newly independent countries, all still 
enjoying Commonwealth tariff preferences, with Britain as their main 
trading partner. When Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, a man of 
empire from the generation that had fought on the Western front in 
World War I, initiated Britain's entry into Europe, the old white domin­
ions were aghast. They felt abandoned after having fought alongside 
Britain in two world wars. Sir Robert Menzies, the Australian prime min­
ister, in a powerful intervention demolished Macmillan's assurances that 
there would be continuing close ties with the Commonwealth after 
Britain joined the European Economic Communi ty. 
"I run a federation. I know how federations work," he said. They were 
either centripetal, in which case the states would come closer and closer 
together as in Australia, or they were centrifugal, with the states moving 
further and further apart until they eventually broke away. They were 
never static. There could be no other dynamic at work in such groupings . 
If Britain joined the EEC, its ties with the Commonwealth would weaken 
and atrophy. Looking back over the past 40 years, I have been reminded 
how prophetic Menzies was. 
Britain and the Europeans have got closer together. Even the old 
Commonwealth countries, kith and kin notwithstanding, no longer share 
those deep emotional bonds of the 1960s. Their destinies have gone their 
different ways in their separate continents. Twenty-five years later, in 
1998, the British were still divided over whether to be in one currency, 
the Euro, and (what many fear and do not want) a federal supranational 
government of Europe. 
Already in 1989, with over 40 leaders, there was no longer that sense 
of shared values. It was a club whose members came and went unexpect­
edly with the vagaries of elections or coups, with no time to bid farewell. 
There was an ephemeral quality in most of the hot topics of the day-the 
370 From Third World to First 
New International Economic Order, North-South dialogue, South-South 
cooperation, Rhodesia, apartheid-they are part of history. Nevertheless 
each conference served a purpose. A leader could highlight certain points 
directly with other leaders and put the wrong party on the defensive, as 
happened when India supp�rted the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. 
Face to face, Mrs. Gandhi could not, and to her credit, did not, defend 
India's position. This made an impression on the other leaders and influ­
enced their stand on this problem. There was value in attending these 
conferences. But I had attended too many and it was time to move on. 
During Commonwealth conferences, every head of government would be 
granted an audience with the queen as head of the Commonwealth. The 
only exception was the 1971 conference in Singapore, when for some rea­
son the Heath government decided that the queen would not attend. 
I had first called on her in September 1966. She was amazingly good 
at putting her guests at ease without seeming to do so, a social skill 
perfected by training and experience. She was gracious, friendly, and gen­
uinely interested in Singapore because her uncle, Lord Louis Mount­
batten, had told her of his time here as Allied commander in chief, South 
East Asia Command. 
When I saw her in London in January 1969, she said she was sorry the 
British had decided to withdraw from Singapore. She looked sad to see an 
important chapter of Britain's history come to an end. She visited 
Singapore in 1972 to make up for the visit she did not make in 1971. I 
made sure she saw all the places Lord Mountbatten had told her about, 
including the City Hall Chamber where he had taken the surrender of the 
Japanese, the lstana where he had stayed, and the Kranji Commonwealth 
War Cemetery. Surprisingly huge crowds gathered on the roadsides wait­
ing to see her pass by. They surged forward to surround her whenever she 
got out from the car. Her assistant private secretary, Philip Moore, who 
had been the U.K. deputy high commissioner to Singapore in the 1960s, 
asked me not to have the security officers hold the crowds back as they 
were friendly. The queen was completely at ease, happy, and relaxed. 
To commemorate her visit, the queen made me a Knight Grand Cross 
of the Order of St. Michael and St. George (GCMG). Earlier, Harold 
Inside the Commonwe alth Club 371 
Wilson as prime minister had recommended me for the Companion of 
Honour (CH) in the 1970 New Year's honors list. It was not usual for 
such a high decoration to be awarded to a young man of 47. Before I was 
50, I had received two British honors much prized by those brought up in 
Britain's former empire. Long years of association had nurtured certain 
values. I have received honors from President Nasser of Egypt, Emperor 
Hirohito of Japan, President Suharto of Indonesia, President Park Chung 
Hee of Korea, and Prince Sihanouk of Cambodia among others. They do 
not carry the same emotional connotation. I did not think it appropriate 
to use the title "Sir" that went with the GCMG, but was happy to have 
received two coveted British trophies, even though they no longer opened 
doors with the British as they used to in the days of empire. 
23. New Bonds with Britain 
On 24 September 1975, the Gordon Highlanders' drums and pipes struck 
up in final farewell as the HMS Mermaid pulled out of Sembawang Naval 
Base. It was a mere 2,500-tonne frigate-a tiny component of the Royal 
Navy warships and aircraft carriers that once were based there. The last of 
the British troops left soon after. Their departure marked the end of 150 
years of British political and military influence in the region. 
The economic strength of the United States, Japan, Germany , and the 
European Economic Community prevailed over the region. This meant 
we had to build up our links with these other powers from scratch. For me 
personally, it was a difficult adjustment. After a lifetime of close associa­
tion, I had come to know British society and its leaders well. Listening to 
the BBC World Service and reading British newspapers had become a 
habit. I had a network of friends and acquaintances in both the Labour 
and Conservative parties. It was easy to make contact and have a meeting 
of minds. After their pullout I had to learn about and get to know Ameri­
can leaders and the different style and standards of their media, and to 
gain some understanding of American society, which was so much bigger 
and more diverse. Doing this with the Japanese, French, and Germans 
was even more difficult because we neither spoke their languages nor 
understood their customs. 
Although old ties with Britain continued even as we widened our 
links and established relations with these important new centers of wealth 
and power, it was nevertheless sad to see Britain's gradual economic dis-
374 From Third World to First 
placement by Japan, Germany, and France. Time and again, its recovery 
was slowed down by industrial action of unions driven by class antago­
nism and not merely economic injustice. I believe one great obstacle to 
Britain's adjustment to its postimperial condition was its class-conscious 
society. It was slow to shed class distinctions. Without empire, Britain 
needed a meritocracy to retain its position as the leading nation of 
Europe, not a ruling class that distinguished itself from the working class 
by its accent, social manners, and habits, old boy network, clubs, and 
old school ties. Akio Morita was chairman of Sony in 1991 when he told 
me that Sony found it hard to get engineers in its British factories to go to 
the production line. Japanese engineers start from the bottom so as to 
fraternize with and understand the people who would be working under 
them. British engineers, he said, preferred their own private rooms. 
Aware of these shortcomings , Thatcher as prime minister downgraded 
class and promoted meritocracy. John Major, her successor, spoke of a 
"classless" Britain. Prime Minister Tony Blair's New Labour wants Britain 
to be rid of class consciousness. 
What was worse, welfarism introduced by the Labour Party in the 
1940s, and sustained by the Conservatives in a bipartisan consensus, had 
blunted the people's motivation to exert themselves and excel, at the 
expense of the economy. Most leaders in both main parties, and even in the 
Liberal Party, were aware of the debilitating effects of welfarism. But no 
one tackled this problem until Margaret Thatcher became prime minister. 
As Britain's worldwide influence shrank, so did the worldview of its 
younger parliamentarians and ministers. Some old friends, British com­
manders who had fought in the last world war and had served in Singa­
pore defending us against Sukarno's Confrontation, compared the old 
generation British leaders to oak trees with wide-spreading branches and 
deep roots. They described their younger leaders as "bonsai oak," recog­
nizably oak trees, but miniaturized, because their root area had shrunk. 
Adjusting to a different power position was difficult for Britain. It 
was the Conservative Party led by Margaret Thatcher, followed by John 
Major, that reversed the downward trend. British entrepreneurs became 
more self-confident and spearheaded their revival in Southeast Asia, 
including Singapore. The Labour Party returned to power in the 1997 
New Bonds with Britain 375 
election, committed to the same economic principles of the free market. 
It wants to cut down the government 's share of total GDP (gross domestic 
product), encourage exports, and promote trade and investments abroad 
to create jobs in Britain. The triumph of Margaret Thatcher and the 
Conservative Party was in turning around the attitudes of the British peo­
ple. This forced the Labour Party to change from Old to New Labour. 
Habits and ties long established do not change easily. Our students con­
tinue to go to Britain to seek higher education. As Singapore's middle 
class expanded, they sent their children to Britain for their tertiary edu­
cation. By the 1990s, some 5,000 Singapore students were studying in 
British universities and polytechnics. Oxbridge graduates still dominate 
the elite in Singapore. The pulls of history are responsible for this cultural 
lag, a delayed response to changed circumstances. After the British with­
drew their forces the only power in East Asia was America. We needed to 
have some of our best students educated there to understand them, and to 
network with future leaders in their centers of excellence. Even by the 
1990s, the number of our students in the United States was only two­
thirds that in Britain. 
History has locked us into the British educational system. Our profes­
sions are affiliated and geared to Britain's professional institutions: doc­
tors, lawyers, accountants, architects, engineers-the lot. Professional ties 
endure across all echelons of our society. In some sections, however, such 
as medicine, because the United States spends some 14 percent of its 
GDP on health, more than twice what Britain does, American doctors 
and hospitals have excelled. We have gradually forged ties with American 
institutions. But our basic training in medicine is still British. So too 
with the other professions. 
During the Thatcher years of the 1980s, Singapore-British trade grew 
significantly. When she freed capital movements, British investments in 
Singapore increased. They were of a different nature-in high value­
added products such as pharmaceuticals, electronics, and aerospace. By 
the 1990s, Britain was again one of our major investors, the fourth largest 
after the United States, Japan, and Holland. Singapore investments over-
376 From Third World to First 
seas went primarily into Southeast Asia, but a significant number of our 
private entrepreneurs had invested in Britain, especially in tourism. One 
of our major companies bought a chain of hotels in Britain and our 
Government Investment Corporation bought into another chain of over 
100 hotels, confident that the British tourist industry would continue to 
grow, notwithstanding the problems created by IRA bombings. Singa­
pore's main link with Europe is still London. We have more daily flights 
to London than to other capitals in Europe. 
When the British announced the withdrawal of their forces in 1968, 
there were gloomy articles, including one in the Illustrated London News 
that compared it to the retreat of the Roman legions from Britain as the 
Dark Ages descended over Europe. But the analogy was false. Modern 
communications and transportation have brought more Britons to Singa­
pore than in colonial times. The British community now is smaller only 
than the American and Japanese communities. There are more British 
schools in Singapore now, to cater for the children of some 10,000 British 
families, than when we were their colony. Hundreds of Britons now come 
to Singapore on their own to work as engineers, architects, and techni­
cians-no longer on expatriate terms and living in exclusive areas, but on 
local terms and living in the same apartments as Singaporeans. Singapore 
salaries have reached the levels of Britain's. Many British banking and 
financial institutions have set up branches in Singapore as it became one 
of the major international financial centers. The whole economic and 
political landscape has altered beyond recognition. 
In 1982, the City of London made me a Freeman of the City of 
London, an honor which, as a former British subject, I appreciated. I was 
impressed to see how thorough they were about the guest list. They had 
invited all the British ministers and governors who had had dealings with 
me over Singapore. And I was asked to list the personal friends I wanted 
to have present. So I had the joy of having former prime ministers, secre­
taries of state, commanders in chief, the last governor of Singapore, and 
my many personal British friends, all there in the Guildhall to share that 
moment. Among them were Harold Macmillan, Jim Callaghan, Harold 
Wilson, Alec Douglas-Home, Alan Lennox-Boyd, and Duncan Sandys. It 
was an occasion for nostalgia. In responding to the address at the cere­
mony, I said, 
New Bonds with Britain 
When I was a schoolboy 50 years ago in Singapore, my teachers 
held this truth to be self-evident, that London was the centre of 
the world. It was the centre of high finance and banking, as well 
as of the arts, the theatre, the centre of literature, of music, of cul­
ture. It was the centre of gravity of the world, ... as indeed it was 
in September 1939 when a British government decided to honour 
an obligation to the Polish nation, a year after it had glossed over 
an undertaking to the Czech nation. Thus was World War II trig­
gered off, and the world irrevocably changed. 377 
Part of the ceremony was a drive from Westminster to the Guildhall 
in a horse-drawn carriage. It had to be cancelled because a rail strike 
had caused traffic congestion. Industrial problems continued to bedevil 
Britain. Margaret Thatcher's clash with the miners' union was yet to come. 
My long years in office and our historical ties with Britain gave me oppor­
tunities to know successive British prime ministers from Harold Mac­
millan to Tony Blair. 
Harold Macmillan was of my father's generation, an Edwardian 
grandee in appearance and manner with a deceptively languid air and a 
lofty approach to young colonials like me. Sir Alec Douglas-Home was 
the nicest of them all-a real gentleman whose manner on television 
belied the shrewd geopolitical thinker he was. He might have counted 
with matchsticks as he candidly admitted, but he had more solid sense 
than many cerebral ministers on both front benches. 
The most politically skillful of them was Harold Wilson. It was my 
good fortune that we were friends before he became prime minister. I was 
able to persuade him to remain east of Suez for a few years longer. Those 
few years made a difference because a residual British presence stayed on 
in Singapore until mid-1975. This gave us time to sort out our relations 
with Indonesia without making precipitate moves we might later have 
regretted. I personally owed much to Wilson for his staunch support 
when we were in Malaysia and after, as I have recounted earlier in my 
memoirs. The problems he faced in Britain were deep-seated-lowered 
levels of education and skills, lower productivity because unions were not 
378 From Third World to First 
cooperating with management. The Labour Party of the 1960s and 1970s 
was dominated by the trade unions and could not tackle these basic issues, 
hence Wilson was seen as going for quick fixes. To keep the party behind 
him, he had to zigzag, making him appear wily and devious. 
In marked contrast, I found Ted Heath reliable and steadfast. I first 
knew him as Macmillan's minister in charge of negotiating Britain's entry 
into Europe and had lobbied him to protect Singapore's position. We 
became friends during his time as leader of the opposition after Wilson 
won the 1964 election. Often when I was in London, he would have me to 
lunch at his apartment in Albany to talk about Britain, Europe, America, 
and the Commonwealth. He rated Europe more important than America 
and the Commonwealth in Britain's future. Once he had decided on a pol­
icy, he did not lightly change his mind, and he believed in Europe before 
he was prime minister. If I were asked to choose one person from among 
the British prime ministers and ministers whom I knew to accompany me 
on a dangerous mission, I would choose Ted Heath. He would stay to the 
end to accomplish what he had set out to do. Unfortunately, he lacked the 
ability to enthuse and move a people. One on one, he would get animated, 
but on television he would appear wooden, a tremendous disadvantage in 
the age of electronic media. We have remained good friends, meeting 
occasionally in London, in Singapore, and at international meetings like 
Davos. 
When Jim Callaghan spoke to the Cambridge University Labour Club in 
1948, I was in the student audience. He was introduced as an ex-chief 
petty officer in the Royal Navy who had become a junior minister. He 
spoke confidently and well. I got to know him in the mid-1950s when 
attending constitutional talks in London, and we kept in touch over the 
years. Because he became prime minister unexpectedly and rather late in 
life when Wilson resigned in March 1976, he did not have his own polit­
ical agenda. Indeed, Britain was in such dire economic circumstances that 
the IMF had to be brought in. So the agenda was set for him. 
I had appealed to Jim Callaghan when he was prime minister to allow 
Brunei, whose foreign affairs Britain still controlled, to permit our 
Singapore Armed Forces to train in their jungles. The British foreign and 
New Bonds with Britain 379 
Commonwealth office had held up this decision to avoid involvement in 
our sensitive defense relations with Malaysia. I argued that Britain would 
soon not be in charge and we would be able to get this jungle training 
school anyway. Why not allow it while Britain was in charge so that it 
would be part of the political landscape when Brunei became indepen­
dent? He agreed and we established our jungle training school in late 
1976. 
Faced with interminable economic problems including unemploy­
ment, Callaghan's Labour government became protectionist. In April 
1977, George Thomson, by then a life peer and no longer a minister, 
came as Callaghan 's personal envoy to ask if I intended to raise bilateral 
issues with British leaders during the Commonwealth conference in June. 
I said it would not be appropriate to raise bilateral complaints at the 
queen's silver jubilee celebrations, but protested that the British had per­
suaded the Germans to get the EEC to block the entry of Singapore-made 
pocket calculators and monochrome television sets. There had been no 
prior discussions with us. I pointed out that our pocket calculators were 
sophisticated models made with high-level American technology , well 
ahead of British technology. Stopping imports from Singapore would 
mean Britons paying more for the same items from America. So also with 
monochrome television sets built by Japanese companies in Singapore. 
Later the trade barriers were lifted because they did not in fact preserve 
British jobs. 
Callaghan once asked me, "What kind of people are these Japanese? 
They work like ants, they keep increasing their exports but do not 
import." He held the Westerner's stereotype of them, forged by inhuman 
Japanese behavior during World War II. He did not understand them. He 
did not see Japanese investments, as Thatcher later did, as a way to rein­
dustrialize Britain. He was more interested in the Africans, Indians, and 
other members of the Commonwealth. His worldview was focused on 
king and empire. During the Commonwealth Heads of Government 
Meeting (CHOGM) , he gave African leaders every opportunity to air 
their views, especially on Rhodesia and South Africa's apartheid. He was 
the typical British Labour Party leader with a working-class background, 
whose instincts were to stand up for the downtrodden and the oppressed. 
However, he was also hard-headed when it came to tough decisions like 
380 From Third World to First 
getting his Labour government to implement rigorous IMF conditions 
attached to its rescue package for the sterling crisis. 
Callaghan's strength was his "steady as she goes" approach to prob­
lems. He did not look for fancy solutions. He had deep loyalties to the 
trade unions, yet his government was brought down by the unions. 
Margaret Thatcher sat next to me at a dinner in 10 Downing Street in 
October 1970 when Ted Heath was prime minister. She was then minis­
ter for education, and we talked about the loss to Britain when it replaced 
grammar schools with "comprehensives" (mixed-ability schools). The 
bright students lost out without any corresponding gains by the others. 
When she was leader of the opposition, I asked George Thomas, then 
Speaker of the House of Commons, what he thought of her. In his Welsh 
lilt, he said, "She has great passion for Britain and would do the right 
things for Britain. She wants to turn the country around and I believe she 
is the only one with the will to do it." And when I asked Jim Callaghan, 
who was then prime minister, what he thought of her, his answer was, 
"She is the one with trousers on the front bench." These views from a 
Labour Speaker and a Labour prime minister reinforced my own that she 
was indeed a "conviction politician ." 
When Thatcher won the election in May 1979, I cheered for her. She 
was for free competition in a free market. During her years in opposition, 
I met her in London and on the several visits she made to Singapore, usu­
ally on her way to Australia and New Zealand. In June 1979, a month 
after she became prime minister, I had an hour's discussion with her 
before lunch at 10 Downing Street. She was brimming with ideas. In July 
1980, she wrote as leader of the Conservative Party to invite me to be its 
guest speaker, the first ever from the Commonwealth, at the party confer­
ence in Brighton that October. I replied that I could not accept the honor 
because of my long association with the Labour Party, one that went back 
to my student days in the Britain of the 1940s. 
She was an intense person, full of determination and drive, confident 
that she could implement her domestic economic policy, but under no 
illusion about the difficulties she would face from the unions. So when the 
coal miners' strike began in March 1984, I felt she would take the fight to 
New Bonds with Britain 381 
the finish. But I did not expect such nastiness in the clashes between the 
strikers and the police to last for a whole year. Her predecessors would not 
have toughed it out. 
In April 1985, Thatcher paid us an official visit. At dinner, I congrat­
ulated her for trimming the excesses of the welfare state: 
For nearly four decades since the war, successive British govern­
ments seemed to assume that the creation of wealth came about 
naturally, and that what needed government attention and inge­
nuity was the redistribution of wealth. So governments devised 
ingenious ways to transfer incomes from the successful to the less 
successful. In this climate, it requires a prime minister with very 
strong nerves to tell voters the truth, that creators of wealth are 
precious members of a society who deserve honour plus the right 
to keep a better part of their rewards .... We have used to advan­
tage what Britain left behind: the English language, the legal sys­
tem, parliamentary government and impartial administration. 
However, we have studiously avoided the practices of the welfare 
state. We saw how a great people reduced themselves to medioc­
rity by levelling down. 
Thatcher responded graciously in similar vein: "I like to think that 
once you learnt it from Britain. And now we are relearning it from 
you .... Talent, initiative, adventure, endeavou r, risk, confidence, vigour 
have made Singapore an example to other nations of success--an example 
whose clear message is that you can't enjoy the fruits of effort without 
first making the effort." 
The next day several pro-Labour British papers carried an outburst 
from Labour shadow health minister Frank Dobson: "Mr. Lee should keep 
his stupid mouth closed." A Labour MP, Allen Adams, added, "If we are 
going to take his state as a model, the country would be going back to 
1870 when people worked in sweatshops around the clock for virtually 
nothing." 
This was the stereotypical Old Labour, minds that had not kept up 
with developments. In 1985, Singapore's per capita GDP was US$6,500 
as against Britain's US$8,200. By 1995, Singapore's per capita GDP of 
382 From Third World to First 
US$26,000 had surpassed Britain's US$19,700. Our workers earned more 
than the British workers. They also owned their own homes and had more 
savings (in Central Provident Fund and POSBank accounts) than the 
British workers. 
When Thatcher resigned in November 1990, she sent me this 
farewell letter: "How unexpected life can be: who would have imagined 
that we should both leave the highest office in our respective countries on 
almost the same day, after so many years of working together. But as I 
leave, I just wanted to say how enormously I have benefited from our asso­
ciation and admired all that you stood for. One thing surely cannot be in 
doubt: Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings will be much 
duller without either of us present!" 
I had more dealings with Margaret Thatcher than with other British 
prime ministers because she was in power for three terms. Of all the 
prime ministers, I thought she offered the best hope for Britain. Her 
strengths were her passionate belief in her country and her iron will to 
turn it around. She was convinced that free enterprise and the free market 
led to a free society. Her basic political instincts were sound though she 
tended to be too self-confident and self-righteous. Her disadvantage, in a 
class-conscious Britain, was her background as "the grocer's daughter." It 
was a pity that the British establishment still labored under these preju­
dices. By the time she left office, Britons had become less class-ridden. 
However, Thatcher could provoke great antipathy from the prime 
ministers of the old white dominions. At the Bahamas Commonwealth 
Heads of Government Meeting in 1985, both the Canadian and Australian 
prime ministers , Brian Mulroney and Bob Hawke, badgered and pressed 
her to agree to economic sanctions against South Africa. All the opening 
speeches at the conference , except hers, attacked South Africa's apartheid. 
Thatcher alone stood against imposition of further sanctions on Pretoria, 
calling instead for a dialogue. I respected her strength to withstand this 
isolation. She refused to be browbeaten and bludgeoned into submission. 
Unfortunately, she was on the wrong side of history. 
John Major was chancellor of the exchequer when he accompanied Mar­
garet Thatcher to the CHOGM in Kuala Lumpur in October 1989. I met 
New Bonds with Britain 383 
him again at 10 Downing Street in May 1996. He had a tough assign­
ment. Margaret Thatcher had thrown her weight behind his election as 
Conservative Party leader and prime minister and expected him to stick 
to her policies on Europe. Her influence in the party made life difficult for 
him. The media too did not give him much of a grace period, writing him 
off within months. And so, although the economy was doing well, it did 
not help him against New Labour in May 1997. 
I was struck by the youthful energy of Tony Blair when I first met him 
in London in May 1995, when he was leader of the opposition. He was a 
year younger than my son, Loong. Jonathan Powell, his chief of staff, took 
notes and followed up. Blair wanted to know the factors that made the 
difference between East Asia's high sustained growth and Britain and 
Europe's more sluggish rates. I suggested that he visit East Asia before the 
election and see its tremendous transformation. After he took office he 
would be insulated by protocol. 
The following January he visited Japan, Australia, then Singapore, 
where he met our trade union leaders and saw the benefits they had 
obtained for union members. He was interested in our individualized old­
age pension accounts-the Central Provident Fund (CPF), which also 
provided funds for home ownership and medical services. He made no 
secret of his deep Christian beliefs which made him a socialist or, as he 
added when I looked askance, a social democrat. He was candid enough to 
repeat "or a social democrat, " something Old Labour scorned. His "New 
Labour" was not a pose. He asked me what the prospects were for a suc­
cessful Labour government. I said he would have a difficult time, once 
Labour was in government, getting Old Labour to accept his policy. The 
Labour Party was much older than he was and would not change so easily. 
A few days after Blair's visit, Chris Smith, the shadow minister for 
social security, came to study our system, and a few months later, Peter 
Mandelson, a close aide of Tony Blair, came to look at our Medisave, 
health insurance and other functions of Singapore's CPF. Blair struck me 
as a serious politician wanting to learn about the developments in East 
Asia and the reasons they were successful. When we met again in London 
that autumn, there was an endless flow of questions over dinner. 
384 From Third World to First 
The studied humility with which he presented himself and his party 
after his stupendous election victory in May 1997 was a tribute to his self­
discipline . I watched the television coverage of his victory speech and his 
walk to 10 Downing Street. It reflected well on his team. I was in London 
a month after he won. We talked for an hour, and again wasted no time on 
pleasantries. He was focused on the tasks he had set for his government in 
his election promises. He was on overdrive , but not unduly elated at hav­
ing been thrust into power at such a young age. We talked about China 
and the approaching handover of Hong Kong at the end of June. He was 
pragmatic in his approach in not wanting to rake over the coals Chris 
Patten had fired. Instead he was looking ahead to the longer-term future 
of Sino-British ties. As I expected, he attended the handover ceremony 
and had talks with President Jiang Zemin. 
A year later, May 1998, when we again met at No. 10, he was all 
focused on the pressing issues, especially the Northern Ireland peace 
talks. He found time to discuss a range of other subjects, but not bilateral 
problems because there were none. Our circumstances had changed; 
Singapore was no longer as involved with Britain in matters of defense 
and security as with the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. My 
generation was Anglocentric, my son's generation is more focused on 
America. Loong and his contemporaries have to understand the United 
States. They have trained in U.S. military institutions and have done post­
graduate studies in colleges like Harvard and Stanford. I lived under Pax 
Britannica; Loong's generation has to cope under Pax Americana. 
24. Ties with Australia and New Zealand 
Japan's sudden invasion in December 1941 dramatically changed Austra­
lia's memories of Singapore. Some 18,000 of its troops with no combat 
experience, together with 70,000 British and Indians, had to fight with­
out adequate air cover against a battle-hardened Japanese Imperial Army. 
By the time Singapore fell in February 1942 about 2,000 Australians had 
been killed, over 1,000 wounded, and some 15,000 captured. 
More than one-third of the prisoners of war died from malnutrition, 
disease, and ill-treatment, especially along the infamous Burma Railway. 
Many gravestones stand at the Kranji Commonwealth War Cemetery in 
Singapore, mute testimony to their sacrifice for king and country. The 
capture of thousands of their soldiers by the Japanese Imperial Army in 
Singapore will forever be seared into Australia's national memory, a disas­
ter second only to Gallipoli. But Singapore is nearer home and strategi­
cally more relevant to Australia. Hence, after World War II, Australia 
continued its old links with Britain and its troops returned to Singapore 
to help put down communist insurgency in Malaya. 
An Australian contingent was stationed in Malaya until Britain 
announced its withdrawal from east of Suez. I urged Australia's Prime 
Minister John Gorton, to stay on in Malaya. While in London in January 
1969 for a Commonwealth prime ministers' conference, Gorton held a 
preliminary meeting with British Defence Minister Denis Healey, New 
Zealand Prime Minister Keith Holyoake, the Tunku, and myself to dis-
386 From Third World to First 
cuss new defense arrangements for Malaysia and Singapore. Gorton was 
highly strung. His fidgeting and voice showed he was not keen to take on 
this responsibili ty, which he knew would fall mainly on Australian shoul­
ders as the British would be phasing themselves out of the region. 
We agreed to postpone the decision to our next meeting, in Canberra 
that June. But in May, violent communal riots broke out in Kuala Lum­
pur, jeopardizing Australia's continued participation in defense arrange­
ments for Malaysia and Singapore. I have described earlier how this was 
resolved. Gorton's doubts notwithstanding, we agreed on the Five-Power 
Defence Arrangement (FPDA) by an exchange of letters in December 
1971. His more stout-hearted defense minister, Malcolm Fraser, was 
against any backing off as a result of communal riots in Kuala Lumpur. In 
the end, Gorton decided to withdraw his forces from Ma-laya before 1971 
and move them to Singapore. The Australians feared their capabilities 
might not be adequate for the responsibilities. They knew that only a 
small contingent from New Zealand would remain with them in 
Singapore. Their only source of comfort in a crisis was the United States, 
through ANZUS, the Australia-New Zealand-U.S. treaty. 
From the beginning, we had close rapport with both the Australian 
and New Zealand governments because there was a convergence of views 
on regional security; the Vietnam War was getting difficult. I had easy 
relations with Harold Holt and his successors, John Gorton and William 
McMahon. In 1972, Labor governments came into power in both New 
Zealand and Australia. Prime Minister Norman Kirk had a sturdy 
approach to security issues and did not change New Zealand's defense 
position. But Australia's prime minister, Gough Whitlam, was uneasy 
about his country's defense commitments both in Vietnam and in Malaya/ 
Singapore. He decided soon after he won the 1972 election to withdraw 
his troops in Singapore from the FPDA. 
In the 1970s, when we first asked Australia for permission to use 
their training areas for military exercises, they were not forthcoming. 
New Zealand, on the other hand, readily agreed. Australia changed its 
policy in 1980, allowing us to have land exercises, and in 1981, air force 
training at an RAAF base. When Paul Keating was Australia's Labor 
prime minister in the early 1990s, he went further and allowed expansion 
of Singapore Armed Forces training in Australia. John Howard's Liberal-
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 387 
National coalition government has continued this policy. Australia's 
geostrategic goals are similar to Singapore's. We both view a U.S. military 
presence in the region as vital for maintaining the balance of power in the 
Asia Pacific region and good for security and stability, without which the 
rapid economic growth of the region would not have taken place. Viewed 
against this larger backdrop, our differences over trade and other matters 
were insignificant. 
I spent years trying to persuade Malcolm Fraser to open up Australia's 
economy to competition and become part of the region. I had explained to 
him and his minister for foreign affairs, Andrew Peacock, that they had 
made Australia an important player in the region through their active 
involvement in defense and security and their aid programs. But their pro­
tectionist economic policies cut them off from these growing economies 
which could not export simple manufactures to Australia because of quo­
tas and high tariffs. Intellectually, they accepted my arguments; politically, 
Fraser did not have the strength to oppose his unions or his manufacturers, 
both of whom wanted protection. 
At the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional (Asia/Pacific) 
Meeting (CHOGRM) in 1980 in New Delhi, Fraser was crusading against 
the European Economic Community's (EEC) protectionist policies which 
shut off Australian agricultural exports. I cautioned him that he would 
gather little support from the developing countries because they saw 
Australia resorting to the same policies to protect its own industries that had 
lost their comparative advantage. Furthermore, Australia would become 
increasingly irrelevant to Asean countries because when they had to decide 
on major policies, Australia did not appear on their balance sheets. 
Succeeding Australian governments have brought their country closer 
to Asia. Paul Keating, who became prime minister after Bob Hawke, was 
convinced that economically Australia needed to plug into Asia, and per­
sonally pushed a closer-to-Asia policy. With a good mind, a strong grasp 
of economics, and geopolitical sense, he had served as treasurer (finance 
minister) for many years under Bob Hawke. But what he could do as a 
Labor Party prime minister was limited by the powerful influence of the 
Australian trade unions over his party. 
388 From Third World to First 
One other minister who made a special effort to get closer to Asia was 
Gareth Evans. He had a sharp mind and, when challenged, a sharper 
tongue, but a good heart. As foreign minister under Hawke and Keating, 
Evans implemented a radical change in foreign policy. He set out to make 
Australia a part of the action in Asia, and so share in its economic growth. 
He did not want Australia to remain just an exporter of raw materials to 
Japan while the Japanese made cars and electronic products in Australia 
with Japanese technology. Evans developed close personal relations with 
the Asean foreign ministers. This must have been quite an effort because 
of their totally different habits. In Asean, serious differences were often 
resolved not across a table but in between hitting a golf ball. So he chased 
the golf ball with them. 
In the early years of Hawke's Labor government, I thought his Asia 
policy was yet another public relations effort. When Keating also pursued 
this policy, I concluded this was a major policy shift. The Australians had 
revised their assumptions and assessments. They might have been an off­
shoot of Britain and Europe, but their future was more with Asia. They 
saw that the economies most complementary with theirs were those in 
East Asia. These countries- Japan, South Korea, China, Taiwan, and 
Asean-would need Australia's agricultural products and minerals and 
would also find its wide-open spaces, golf courses, resorts, and beaches 
great for holidays. America, although a powerful ally for political and 
security reasons, would compete against Australia as an exporter of agri­
cultural products. 
At a conference in Sydney organized by the Australian Financ ial Review in 
April 1994, Gareth Evans, the minister for foreign affairs, invited me to 
speak candidly about Australia. I took him at his word. Australia, I said, 
was "a lucky country with an embarrassment of riches." Australia had 
high consumption, low savings, low competitiveness, high current 
account deficit, and high debt, with most of its exports in minerals and 
agricultural products. I believed more reform was unavoidable if they 
wanted to complete the restructuring of their economy and compete. 
The Financial Review editors who had invited me gave much publicity 
to my frank comments. But the tabloids were indignant. They were part 
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 389 
of the problem. The country's popular media, including a TV series pro­
duced by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation in 1991, had portrayed 
the economic achievements of East Asia as "a Third World hellhole 
of sweat shops, sex tourism and repressive regimes." They completely 
ignored the reality that an increasing number of Taiwanese, after studying 
and working in the United States, were bringing home American tech­
nology and knowledge to build their own Silicon Valley in Taiwan. 
I replied to their media at the Australian National Press Club in 
Canberra. They had failed to inform Australians about the transformation 
of a region of nearly 2 billion people from agricultural backwardness to 
industrial and high-tech societies. These countries, including China, were 
producing millions of engineers and scientists. R&D in Japan had enabled 
the Japanese to launch satellites into space and to probe the mysteries of 
genetic engineering. These developments went unreported in Australia. 
The American media, on the other hand, had publicized the industrializa­
tion and high growth in East Asia. Although Australian academics were 
well-informed, the people were not. Their ignorance made it difficult for 
any Australian government to gain popular support for changes in its pol­
icy on economic direction and immigration. 
Whether Australia's destiny is tied to Asia's suddenly came to the fore 
with the crisis in East Timor. It was triggered off on 27 January 1999 
when Indonesian Foreign Minister Ali Alatas made a dramatic announce­
ment after a cabinet meeting chaired by President Habibie that there 
would be a "popular consultation" for the people of East Timor to deter­
mine whether to accept special autonomy or become independent. That 
public statement changed the fate of East Timor, with long-term conse­
quences for Indonesia and Australia. Both Alexander Downer, the 
Australian foreign minister, and Prime Minister John Howard were 
known to have easy relations with President Habibie. Unlike Suharto, 
Habibie spoke English and was open to persuasion, especially on East 
Timor. 
Australia's leaders wanted to be rid of the thorn of East Timor that 
bedevilled Australia-Indonesia relations. They had suggested the "New 
Caledonia solution" to Habibie. (There the French had offered a referen-
390 From Third World to First 
dum in 1998 for either continued association with France, or indepen­
dence after a 15-year period of preparation.) The president had recounted 
to Mah Bow Tan (see Chapter 17) how the Australian ambassador, John 
McCarthy, had discussed the New Caledonia solution with him. Habibie 
had told McCarthy that he would not agree to East Timor having a 15-
year transition to independence, with Indonesian economic support dur­
ing this period. If they rejected autonomy , they would be out on their 
own. Indonesia was not going to play "rich uncle." Habibie said Howard 
subsequently sent him a letter that contained Habibie's ideas, whereupon 
he scribbled a memo to his key ministers on 21 January 1999, asking 
them to study whether it was wise for the MPR (People's Consultative 
Assembly) to decide on letting East Timor respectfully separate itself 
from the Republic of Indonesia. He attached Howard's letter which 
emphasize d that East Timorese opinion was insisting on an act of self­
determination. It took Habibie less than a week to decide on the choice of 
autonomy or independence for East Timor. In May, an agreement was 
signed in New York between Indonesia, Portugal, and the UN to provide 
for a ballot on 8 August 1999. In June, the UN Security Council adopted 
a resolution establishing UNAMET (UN Assistance Mission to East 
Timor). 
But in February 1999, soon after Ali Alatas's startling announcement, 
the Indonesians began to arm the prointegration militias. Killings and 
intimidation of those favoring independence became daily occurrences. 
Despite all the difficulties, UNAMET conducted a ballot on 30 August, 
when almost all voted. When the result was announced on 4 September 
that nearly 80 percent had voted for independence, hell broke loose. The 
country was systematically devastated and its population uprooted : 
250,000 were moved to West Timor, the rest fled into the hills. 
Under tremendous international pressure for a week, Habibie finally 
invited international peacekeepers to restore order. The UN Security 
Council adopted a resolution authorizing the deployment of a multina­
tional force to East Timor (lnterFET). Inevitably, it had to be led by 
Australia; the nearest base for lnterFET was Darwin. Australians learned 
yet again how emotional their Indonesian neighbors were. 
Publicly, the Indonesians stated their preference for Asean troops. 
Privately, lower levels of the TNI disagreed, hinting there could be casu-
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 391 
alties. The U.S. secretary for defense announced that he would send only 
a communications and logistics support group, not combat troops. 
Australia had to lead the pack. Fearful of being seen as an army of 4,000 
white troops supported by 1,000 mainly white New Zealanders , Australia 
sought Asian support, primarily from the countries of Asean. At an APEC 
meeting in Auckland in September, Prime Minister John Howard asked 
Singapore to participate and Prime Minister Goh agreed. So Singapore 
committed itself to providing a medical team, military observers, liaison 
officers, logistics support, and two LSTs (Landing Ship Tanks)--270 men 
from a population of 3 million. 
The day after the UN Security Council authorized lnterFET, the 
Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) team arrived in Darwin. Our SAF mission 
commander , Colonel Neo Kian Hong, flew into Dili with the lnterFET 
commander , Major-General Peter Cosgrove, to meet the Indonesian 
Restoration Operations Command in East Timor. And when the first 
wave of lnterFET forces arrived in Dili on 20 Septemb er, there was a 
Singapore face in Cosgrove's team. 
The Bulletin (an Australian weekly) of 28 September 1999 reported, 
"The Howard Doctrine-the PM himself embraces the term-sees 
Australia acting in a sort of 'deputy' peacekeep ing capacity in our region 
to the global policeman role of the U.S." This Bulletin report drew an 
immediate retort from the Malaysian deputy prime minister, Abdullah 
Badawi: "There is no need for any country to play a role as leader, com­
mander or deputy. They [Australians} are not sensitive to our feeling." A 
Thai foreign ministry official phrased it more diplomaticall y, that it was 
not appropriate for the Australians to appoint themselves as the deputy of 
the Americans in protecting security in the region. The issue subsided 
after Howard said in Parliament (27 September) that Australia was not 
playing the role of a deputy for the United States or any other country, 
that the word "deputy" was coined by the Bulletin's correspondent. 
To add heat to the controversy, while attending a UN General 
Assembly meeting in New York, Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir 
criticized Australian troops as "rather heavy-handed" in the way they had 
pointed guns at the heads of suspected militiamen. He added, "Indonesia 
had been pouring in a lot of money into East Timor and the international 
commun ity should allow Indonesia to practise democracy and show the 
392 From Third World to First 
East Timorese they can gain from being integrated with Indonesia." East 
Timorese leader Jose Ramos-Horta, joint Nobel Prize winner with Bishop 
Carlos Belo, responded that Malaysia had "an extremely poor record in 
upholding human rights in East Timor. No one would cooperate with the 
Malaysian commander. There could be even total civil disobedien ce." 
Ramos-Horta wanted to scotch an earlier proposal by the UN 
secretary-general to put a Malaysian in command of the UN peacekeeping 
force that would replace lnterFET in January 2000. He added, "East 
Timor doesn't want to be part of Asean. We want to be part of the South 
Pacific Forum." East Timorese leaders had concluded that Australia was 
the most reliable of their neighbors. 
Australia had been drawn into the East Timor conflict. In World War 
II, Australian troops fighting the Japanese there were helped by the local 
population who were then brutally punished by the Japanese. To add to 
Australia 's sense of guilt, Prime Minister Gough Whitlam had during 
several meetings with Suharto acquiesced in his intention to occupy and 
annex East Timor. (Indonesians say Whitlam encouraged Suharto.) At the 
UN in 1976, Australia had voted for Indonesia in the resolution on East 
Timor. Singapore had abstained . When repression followed the occupa­
tion in 1975, East Timorese resistance fighters based themselves in 
Australia. For 24 years, this issue had simmered away. 
When Paul Keating met me in September 1999, he predicted that 
Australia would be drawn into a prolonged conflict with Indonesia. He 
added that Howard's letter to Habibie would undo the good relations 
with Indonesia that he had painstakingly built up, culminating in the 
security pact he had signed with Suharto in 1995. As he had foreseen, the 
Indonesians tore it up on 16 September 1999, the day after the UN 
Security Council approved lnterFET . 
East Timor developments were driven by the Australian media and 
popular sentiments, by the Portuguese government getting the European 
Union to pressure Indonesia at every international gathering, and by the 
U.S. media, NGOs, and congressional aides. They were constantly bark­
ing and nipping at Indonesia's heels, making it an issue that dogged 
Indonesia at every international forum. Habibie thought he could be rid 
of this burden by his proposal. But neither Australia, the European 
Union, nor the United States had asked for or wanted an independent 
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 393 
East Timor. Habibie did not realize that he would never be forgiven by 
Indonesian nationalists for offering a ballot that could only lead to inde­
pendence . 
Whether or not it was wise to have proposed self-determination for 
East Timar, Australia did right in leading lnterFET into East Timar to 
put a stop to the inhumanity being perpetrated. While no Asian leader 
voiced support for Australia as it led lnterFET troops into East Timar, all 
knew that Australia was saving an ugly situation from getting worse. It 
was an operation costly in political and economic terms for Australia, a 
task no country in the region would have undertaken. If Australia had not 
acted after the part it had played leading to the vote for independence, it 
would have earned its neighbors' contempt. As it turned out, the quiet 
and firm manner in which Major-General Cosgrove commande d lnterFET 
troops won the quiet respect of many leaders in the region. As expected, 
Indonesian crowds demonstrated daily outside the Australian embassy in 
Jakarta. Australian nationals working in various towns of Indonesia had 
to be evacuated. 
I had watched with fascination as the East Timar crisis developed. 
Howard and Downer based their policy on Habibie's responses. Habibie 
wanted to persuade the Indonesian people to reelect him as their presi­
dent by showing that international leaders like John Howard thought 
highly of him as a democrat and a reformer. The Australian leaders had 
overlooked the powerful forces that Habibie had to contend with: the 
more than 5,000 graves of Indonesian soldiers in East Timar; the large 
coffee and other plantations that had been parcelled out to previous serv­
ing TNI officers; the fear of TNI senior officers that East Timor's indepen­
dence could aggravate separatist movements in Aceh and other provinces. 
Habibie was not in a position to give up East Timar without serious 
repercussions. 
I had expected the militias to try to influence the votes by fair means 
or foul. But I never imagined they would systematically devastate the 
country in the two weeks between the announce ment of the referendum 
results and the arrival of lnterFET forces. It did not make sense for the 
TNI to allow them to do this, but then many things that did not make 
sense had happened, which is why Singapore, like the others in Asean, 
had stayed out of the East Timar issue. 
394 From Third World to First 
When Abdurrahman Wahid was a candidate for president, he said on 
13 October that Australia had been "pissing in our face" and proposed 
freezing relations. Ten days after his election as president, he said, "If 
Australia needs to be accepted by a nation of 210 million people, we will 
receive [them} with an open heart. If they want to separate from us, it's 
okay." The Australian ambassador had been hard at work to moderate the 
rhetoric, but it will be some time before relations return to what they 
were before this crisis. 
The Australians have had a baptism of fire in an Asian crisis. Prime 
Minister John Howard may not have understood the danger of dealing 
with a transitional president like Habibie, but when the defining 
moment came, Howard acted as a prime minister of Australia should. 
With strong support from the Australian media and public, he sent 
Australian troops to lead lnterFET forces into East Timor, despite threats 
by the militias to inflict casualties on the Australians. These events con­
firmed the obvious, that Australia's destiny is linked more to Asia, than 
to Britain or Europe. 
My first meeting with Gough Whitlam after he became prime minister 
was at the 197 3 Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting 
(CHOGM) in Ottawa. Whitlam was a handsome man, and very conscious 
of his good looks. He was quick-witted but also quick-tempered and 
impulsive in his repartees. He proudly told the assembled leaders that he 
had changed Australia's restrictive immigration policy and would not 
require Asians who were educated in Australian universities to leave after 
their graduation. I took him to task over this "new look policy," pointing 
out that he only accepted skilled and professional Asians and that this cre­
ated a serious brain-drain for Singapore and his other poor Asian neigh­
bors. He was furious. 
He also announced in dramatic fashion his change of direction to be a 
"good neighbour " in the region and a "good friend" of the Afro-Asian 
countries. I challenged his claims and cited examples like his quota 
restrictions on the import of shirts into Australia and on traffic rights for 
Singapore Airlines. He took this as a personal slight and his exchanges 
became acerbic. He was a new boy whereas I had old friends around the 
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 395 
table in Britain's Ted Heath, Canada's Pierre Trudeau, Norman Kirk of 
New Zealand, Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, and Errol Barrow of Barbados. 
They spoke up to support my point of view. One result was that Prime 
Minister Norman Kirk of New Zealand emerged as the representative 
voice of the South Pacific supported by Western Samoa, Tonga, and Fiji. 
Whitlam then attacked me publicly to say that Singapore had a large 
ethnic Chinese population and therefore Soviet ships would not come to 
Singapore. The Soviet Union immediatel y diverted four Soviet tenders 
(feeder ships) to Singapore for repairs to test whether we were Chinese or 
Singaporeans. I replied that Whitlam should not provoke the Soviets 
again, for the next time they would send a missile destroyer or a nuclear 
submarine. 
When I returned to Singapore from Tokyo, I learned that an 
Australian representative at the UN had asked the UN high commis­
sioner for refugees to get us to allow some 8,000 Vietnamese refugees who 
had arrived in many boats to disembark in Singapore on humanitarian 
grounds. The following day, 24 May 1973, I summoned the Australian 
high commissioner to tell him that this was a most unfriendly act. Once 
they landed, we would never be able to get them to leave. He explained 
that out of the 8,000 boat people, the Australians were prepared to take 
about 65 who had been educated in Australia. Only by disembarking 
them could he sort out the 65 or 100 that Australia would accept. I asked 
what would happen to the balance of the 8,000 who would have disem­
barked and would refuse to go back to the ships. He mumbled a vague 
reply. I said his action showed that his present government was unfriendly 
to Singapore. At a reception in Canberra, his prime minister had unjustly 
ticked off the No. 2 in our high commission for this refugee problem. Far 
from Whitlam being the aggrieved party, I was prepared to expose his 
moves and show him up as a sham white Afro-Asian. The Australian high 
commissioner was sweating with discomfiture. The refugees were not 
allowed to land. We accepted 150 fishermen and their families. The rest 
sailed on to Indonesia, some to Australia. 
It was a time of considerable stress for both Australia and Singapore 
or these exchanges would not have been traded between friends. The 
American withdrawal from Vietnam and the exodus of Vietnamese boat 
people were traumatic events. It was a relief when their governor-general 
396 From Third World to First 
removed Whitlam for some alleged constitutional irregularities in 
November 1975 and appointed Malcolm Fraser to form a caretaker gov­
ernment to hold a general election, which Fraser won handsomely . 
Malcolm Fraser was huge even for an Australian. I came to know him well 
when he was Gorton's defense minister. When we met in Kuala Lumpur 
at the funeral of Tun Razak in mid-January 1976, I took the opportunity 
to discuss with him the deployment of Australian forces in peninsular 
Malaysia and Singapore. He said there was no question of pulling out. He 
decided to leave his Mirage squadrons and Orion aircraft in Butterworth . 
I felt reassured by his hard-headed approach to security and stability, and 
his determination not to give things away. 
With my encouragement, Fraser saw Prime Minister Mahathir in 
1982. Mahathir said that the Vietnamese foreign minister, Nguyen Co 
Thach, had declared openly that he would provide bases for Soviet forces 
in Vietnam if necessary , and it would be foolish for Malaysia to dismantle 
its bases for foreign countries . It was perfectly acceptable to Malaysia if 
the Australians wished to stay, but if they wanted to leave there was 
nothing Malaysia could do about it. Fraser was satisfied and left his planes 
at Butterworth. 
Fraser had conservative views but was never able to undo the damage 
Whitlam had done in less than three years by precipitately bringing in 
the welfarism that has burdened Australian budgets ever since. We 
became and remained friends, although I disagreed with his protectionist 
economic policies. He was reluctant to open up an economy that cosseted 
its workers at the expense of its consumers. Eventuall y Labor govern­
ments in the late 1980s and 1990s had to face the difficult task of gradu­
ally opening up the country to imports and abandoning uneconomic 
industries. 
When the Australian Labor Party won the general election in March 
1983, I was apprehensive that the troubles we had had with Whitlam 
would resurface. But Bob Hawke was a completely different personality 
from Whitlam , and the Labor leadership had learned from the excesses of 
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 397 
the Whitlam years. Hawke had his heart in the right place and wanted to 
do the right thing, but every time he took something away from the 
workers in one sector, he gave it back in subsidies in some other sector. 
He was Australia 's second longest serving prime minister. He presented 
himself and his arguments well and was always conscious of how he 
would appear on television. 
He withdrew one of the two Mirage squadrons, but deferred decision 
on the second squadron. In March 1984, he decided to run down the 
remaining Mirage squadron gradually between 1986 and 1988. I was able 
to persuade him to keep rotational deployments of his F18s from Darwin 
totalling 16 weeks a year. This arrangement has continued to the present. 
By staying on in Butterworth until 1988, the Australians added to the 
security of Malaysia and Singapore, giving us more than 30 years of sta­
bility and growth. After the race riots in Singapore in 1964 and in Kuala 
Lumpur in 1969, the Australians had been apprehensive about getting 
involved in clashes between Singapore and Malaysia, or in conflicts 
between Indonesia and Malaysia or Singapore. By 1988, the Australians 
had revised their defense assessment; they now considered that the risks 
of such catastrophes were not high and saw strategic and political value 
in staying engaged in the region through the Five-Power Defence 
Agreement. 
Looking back, their prime minister who most impressed me was Bob 
Menzies. Perhaps it was because I was a younger man and more impres­
sionable. I watched his virtuoso performance at the Commonwealth prime 
ministers' meeting in September 1962 in London. He had a commanding 
presence, a strong booming voice coming from a large head on a big, 
broad figure, hair turning white, bristling eyebrows, and an expressive 
ruddy face. He exuded the confidence and authority of a generation that 
had been loyal to king and empire. When, despite his best efforts to dis­
suade it, Britain decided to join the Common Market, he knew that the 
world had changed irrevocably, that sentiments and ties of kinship could 
not displace the realities of geopolitics and geoeconomics in the post­
imperial world. 
Another impressive Australian leader was Paul Hasluck, the external 
affairs minister ( 1964-1969) who later became governor-general ( 1969-
1974). He was quiet, soft-spoken, observant, well-read, and well-brief ed. 
398 From Third World to First 
I met him on my first visit to Australia in 1965 when he was in Menzies's 
cabinet. When Singapore was facing Indonesian Confrontation and, after 
that, British withdrawal, I met him frequently. He steered Australia's for­
eign policy with a steady hand and a deft touch. He did not want to aban­
don Malaysia and Singapore but was careful not to upset the Indonesians 
or make them feel that "they were being ganged up against," as he said 
frankly to me. His values, stressing the importance of family, education, 
and hard work, were those of the prewar generation before Australia came 
to regard itself as the "lucky country." 
Like Australia, New Zealand's links with Singapore were through Britain. 
Because they are further away from Asia, New Zealanders did not feel so 
threatened during World War II by the possibility of Japanese invasion 
and were less suspicious of Asians. They took their share of Vietnamese 
refugees and were less nervous about boat people pouring onto their 
shores. This attitude was to undergo a change by the 1990s after they had 
experienced more Asian immigration. 
On my first visit to New Zealand in April 1965, I was surprised to 
see how British they were in their habits and manners. I stayed in small 
hotels where maids still wore aprons, as British maids did just after the 
war, and brought in "morning tea" before breakfast. Their accent was 
nearer to British accents. There was more courtesy and reserve, less of the 
Australian backslapping mateyness. The country was green, in contrast to 
brown and dusty Australia. For many years, the younger sons of the gen­
try who did not inherit their fathers' estates in England went out to own 
huge farms in New Zealand, rearing sheep and cattle and growing wheat 
for the mother country. It was a gracious way of life that gave them a high 
standard of living. New Zealand developed an advanced system of welfare 
benefits that gave the people one of the best standards of living and a high 
quality of life before World War II. After the war, they became wealthy. 
They held on to this agriculture-based society for longer than was 
wise. The Australians industrialized; they did not. So their bright and 
ambitious young people left in large numbers for Australia, Britain, and 
America. In the 1980s, New Zealand set out on a different course to 
develop an economy to offer opportunities for the talented so that they 
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 399 
need not emigrate. They also brought in well-educated Asian immi­
grants, and they began to market the natural beauty of their countryside, 
promoting tourism on a large scale. It was a belated effort to compete. 
One of their longer-serving prime ministers was Keith Holyoake. I 
first met him when he arrived at Singapore airport in 1964, when we were 
in Malaysia. He was a stout man with a strong, deep voice resonating 
from a barrel of a chest. He was down to earth and had no pretensions. He 
was a farmer and proud of it. He did not pretend to be an intellectual, but 
had the common touch, which must have been one reason why he won 
four successive elections and was prime minister from 1960 to 1972. I 
liked him and respected his integrity. Under pressure, I found him steady 
and unflappable. 
After Britain's Commonwealth secretary, George Thomson, saw me in 
Singapore in 1967 to tell me of Wilson's decision to withdraw their 
forces, I phoned Holyoake. It was November, New Zealand's summer. He 
said he did not think the British would change their minds: He had 
already tried. He wished me luck in my attempt to get more time. He 
ended the conversation, saying, "I am in my holiday home by Lake Taupo. 
It's a sunny day, beautiful and peaceful. You must come and take a holiday 
here. It'll be a break from your work." He had a different sense of danger, 
way down in the South Pacific. Years later, I took up his invitation. Huka 
Lodge near Lake Taupo was indeed tranquil. 
When Norman Kirk became New Zealand's Labour prime minister, 
we met at the 1973 Ottawa Commonwealth conference. He stood out as 
sincere, straight-speaking, not given to persiflage. On his way back to 
New Zealand in December 1973, he visited me. We sat on the front lawn 
of Sri Temasek one evening before dusk, exchanging thoughts on the 
future. The Vietnam War looked like it was coming to an unhappy close. 
I asked how he, from outside the region, saw Singapore and its prospects 
for stability and growth, and where the dangers would come from. His 
reply was direct and pithy. New Zealand was "the odd man out," rich, 
white, democratic. Singapore was "the odd man in," a completely West­
ern city and democratic in the center of Southeast Asia, yet different and 
unique. Its success was its danger; Singapore had become exposed. 
We got on well. I was sad when he died a few months later, in August 
1974. Twenty-plus years after he said this, when Australia and New 
400 From Third World to First 
Zealand wanted to join the Asia side of the Asia Europe Meeting (ASEM) 
of heads of government in Bangkok in 1996, Prime Minister Mahathir 
objected, saying they were not a part of Asia. It was his visceral reaction, 
one not shared by most of the other leaders. I believe before too long the 
logic of geography and economics will prevail against old prejudices, and 
Australia and New Zealand will be included in ASEM. 
Robert Muldoon won the election in December 1975 and remained 
prime minister until 1984. He was stout, with a big bald head, pugna­
cious face, and a combative temperament to match. He stood up to and 
freely traded verbal punches with his Australian counterparts, Malcolm 
Fraser and Bob Hawke, to remind them that Australia could not take 
New Zealand for granted. 
He wanted to separate sports from politics, and strenuously defended 
New Zealand's All Blacks rugby team for playing in South Africa and 
receiving a South African rugby team in New Zealand. To his surprise 
there were violent protests against them in New Zealand. Over the next 
few years, I watched him discover at Commonwealth meetings that New 
Zealand would be isolated if he continued his policy. So, after a strenuous 
defense of his position, at the 1977 CHOGM in London, he agreed to a 
declaration boycotting South Africa in sports because of apartheid. It was 
not worth the fight. He did not hide his sentiments. In 1979, he was one 
of the few at the Lusaka CHOGM who sympathized with Thatcher on her 
stand on Rhodesia and South Africa. But he saw sooner than Thatcher 
that the tide of history was against white domination of Africa. Unlike 
Whitlam, Muldoon never postured as a white Afro-Asian. Instead he 
focused his time and resources on the South Pacific islands. He was a char­
tered accountant, with a mind that could master details and crunch num­
bers. His analysis of economic problems sounded tough-minded but he 
was soft when it came to policy implementation. When farm prices fell, 
he maintained price supports for his farmers. When the manufacturing 
sector faced problems, he gave them more protection. 
It was left to his Labour Party successor, David Lange, to begin the 
difficult process of trimming down subsidies, causing enormous pain to 
those who had been cosseted. Lange was an unusual character, of medium 
height but considerable girth. He had an easygoing manner, a quick 
mind, and a good memory. Soon after he won the 1984 election he visited 
Ties with Australia and New Zealand 401 
me in Singapore on his way to Africa to increase trade with them. I 
expressed my doubts whether this was likely. He chided me for being 
skeptical, but conceded later that I was right. He had a good sense of 
humor and an infectious laugh. 
When the Australians announced in 1972 that they would withdraw 
their battalion from Malaysia in 1973, the New Zealanders decided to 
remain and did so for another 1 7 years. Their sturdier nature earned them 
the nickname "Gurkhas of the South Pacific." However, New Zealanders 
underwent a sea change in July 1984 when they elected Lange and his 
Labour Party. His party decided they did not want a nuclear Pacific and took 
a strong antinuclear stand. They were prepared to jeopardize their ANZUS 
treaty with the United States by refusing to allow any nuclear-powered ship 
or any ship carrying nuclear weapons to sail through New Zealand waters or 
dock in its ports, in effect blocking off the U.S. Navy. It was an astonishing 
reversal of their traditional attitudes. In October that year, when I met Lange 
in Singapore, I told him that nuclear warships frequently passed through the 
Straits of Malacca and the Straits of Singapore , that we recognized the risks 
of nuclear accident but the U.S. naval presence in the region had given us 30 
years of stability. He remained unconvinced. For him and his party, a non­
nuclear world was the only way to a secure future. 
In Canberra in 1986, Bob Hawke asked me to convince Lange that 
their long-term interests were best served by ANZUS. When I visited 
Wellington, I again argued with Lange that his antinuclear policy was 
overcautious, but did not change his mind. Jim Bolger, then the opposi­
tion leader, however, agreed with me that small countries like Singapore 
and New Zealand would have room to maneuvre and make progress only 
if the United States continued to maintain the world balance. He added, 
"New Zealand's anti-nuclear stand would only hasten its disintegration." 
But when he became prime minister in November 1990, public opinion 
made it impossible for him to reverse this policy. New Zealanders had 
decided to opt out of the troubles of the world, for the time being. 
As a Labour prime minister, Lange instinctively felt he had to cham­
pion the underdog. But on economic reforms and opening up the econ­
omy to market forces, he could be persuaded. That was because his 
finance minister, Roger Douglas, was a convinced free-market man and 
carried his prime minister with him during his first term of office. 
402 From Third World to First 
However, during his second term, Lange, under pressure from his cabinet 
and party colleagues, backed away from the more unpopular reforms. This 
delay prolonged the agony for New Zealand farmers, manufacturers, and 
consumers. 
In December 1984, Lange announced , without any prior consulta­
tion, the cancellation of Singapore 's General Scheme of Preferences (GSP) 
status for our exports. In doing so, New Zealand had moved sooner than 
America and the European Community. When our foreign minister 
explained to him that while our loss through the cancellation of GSP 
in New Zealand would be marginal, we would suffer grievously if the 
Americans or Europeans followed them and did the same, Lange accepted 
the argument and restored our GSP status. 
Without a large store of gold, diamonds, coal, uranium, and other 
minerals that provide Australians with a comfortable living, New Zea­
landers did not have the "lucky country" mindset. When the price of the 
food they exported fell in the 1980s, Lange and Douglas reduced price sup­
ports for farmers and made New Zealand more competitive. It was to the 
great credit of Prime Minister Jim Bolger that when his National Party 
returned to power in 1990, he continued these liberalization policies. 
I never had any dispute with the New Zealand leaders, not even Bob 
Muldoon, who could be aggressive and heated in arguments. In my expe­
rience the New Zealanders can be depended on to honor their under­
takings. 
25. South Asia's Legends and Leaders 
As a young student, I admired Nehru and his objective of a secular multi­
racial society. Like most nationalists from British colonies, I had read his 
books written during his long years in British jails, especially his letters 
to his daughter. They were elegantly written, and his views and senti­
ments struck a resonant chord in me. Together with other democratic 
socialists of the 1950s, I had wondered whether India or China would 
become the model for development. I wanted democratic India, not com­
munist China, to win. But despite achievements such as the green revolu­
tion, population growth has kept down India's standard of living and 
quality of life. 
I visited Delhi for the first time as prime minister in April 1962. I 
was driven to Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru's home to meet him. It had been 
the residence of one of the British military commanders-two storys, 
wide verandas, spacious grounds beautifully laid out. We had a half-hour 
discussion. 
For lunch, we were seated at a long table, probably inherited from 
British times. Each guest had a large silver tray as his dinner plate, and 
picked what he fancied from a wide array of rice, chapatis, curries, vegeta­
bles, meats, fish, pickles, and condiments that were brought to him. 
What was unusual was that everyone ate with their fingers. Choo and I 
had had no practice at this. While they held their food neatly and daintily 
with their fingertips, we rummaged through ours, the gravy reaching up 
to our knuckles. We felt and looked messy. I was relieved when silver fin-
404 From Third World to First 
ger bowls of water with slices of lime came for guests to wash their greasy 
fingers before eating the sweets, which were delicious. Nehru, sitting 
opposite me, noticed our awkwardness. I explained that besides chop­
sticks we usually used forks and spoons. Fortunately, they provided us 
with cutlery at other meals in Delhi. 
Nehru was sufficiently interested in what I had told him to invite me 
to a second meeting the next day, when he gave me 90 minutes. I 
explained the demographics of Singapore and of Malaya, and the hold the 
communists had on the Chinese population because of their enormous 
success in transforming China from a corrupt, decadent society into a dis­
ciplined, clean, and dynamic if regimented one. But communism was 
totally unsuited to Southeast Asia. Moreover , an independent Singapore 
would be a disaster, as it would be bound to incur the hostility of its 
neighbors-Malays in Malaya, and Javanese and other Malay racial 
groups in Indonesia. I believed the best solution was to merge Singapore 
with Malaya and the Borneo territories since the Tunku did not want to 
take Singapore alone because then the Chinese would become equal to the 
Malays in voting strength. Nehru was pleasantly surprised to find a 
Chinese so determined not to have Singapore under communist control 
and the influence of Beijing. 
I visited Nehru again in 1964 when I stopped in Delhi on my way 
back from a tour of Africa. He was a shadow of his former self, weary, 
weak in voice and posture, slumped on a sofa. His concentration was poor. 
The Chinese attack across the Himalayas had been a blow to his hopes of 
Afro-Asian solidarity. I left the meeting filled with sadness. He died a few 
months later, in May. 
My meetings with Nehru in the 1960s allowed me to meet his 
daughter, Indira Gandhi. When we became independent, we asked the 
Indian government to help Singapore gain acceptance into Afro-Asian 
organizations; their diplomatic missions gave us unstinting assistance. A 
year later, I visited India to thank Gandhi and to interest her government 
in Southeast Asia. A young, energetic, and optimistic Indira Gandhi met 
me at the airport with a guard of honor, and drove with me to the former 
Vice-regal Lodge, now called Rashtrapati Bhavan. 
Gandhi was frank and friendly toward the end of my three-day stay in 
1966. She said it was difficult for her to carry on with a cabinet not of her 
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 405 
own choosing. Ministers were going in different directions. Although she 
had been appointed in a most cynical manner by the Congress Party 
bosses who wanted to use Nehru's image for the next election, I thought 
that if she won by a handsome majority, she had every intention of gov­
erning in her own right. 
It was sad to see the gradual rundown of the country, visible even in the 
Rashtrapati Bhavan. The crockery and cutlery were dreadful-at dinner 
one knife literally snapped in my hand and nearly bounced into my face. 
Air conditioners, which India had been manufacturing for many years, 
rumbled noisily and ineffectively. The servants, liveried in dingy white and 
red uniforms, removed hospitality liquor from the side tables in our rooms. 
Delhi was "dry" most days of the week. On one occasion, returning to the 
Rashtrapati Bhavan after a reception given by our high commissioner, my 
two Indian ADCs in resplendent uniforms entered the elevator with me 
with their hands behind their backs. As I got out, I noticed they were hold­
ing some bottles. I asked my secretary who explained that they were bot­
tles of Scotch. It was the practice at our high commission's diplomatic 
receptions to give bottles of Johnnie Walker Scotch whisky to deserving 
guests, and each ADC received two. They were not obtainable in India 
because they could not be imported. There was a hypocritical pretense at 
public egalitarianism , with political leaders wearing homespun clothes to 
identify themselves with their poor, while they quietly amassed wealth. 
This undermined the morale of the elite officers, civil and military. 
My few days' stay in the Rashtrapati Bhavan and my meetings with 
their top leaders at receptions and in various settings were a sobering 
experience. On my earlier visits in 1959 and 1962, when Nehru was in 
charge, I thought India showed promise of becoming a thriving society 
and a great power. By the late 1970s, I thought it would become a big 
military power because of its size but not an economically thriving one 
because of its stifling bureaucracy . 
Indian officials were more interested in getting into the joint com­
munique, a commitment from Singapore to join it in its "great concern 
over the danger to the world in general and Southeast Asia in particular 
arising from prolongation of the conflict in Vietnam." Its nonalignment 
policy was tilted toward the Soviet Union; this was the price to ensure a 
regular supply of weapons and military technology. 
406 From Third World to First 
Indira Gandhi visited Singapore two years later, in May 1968. We 
had a wide-ranging exchange during which I concluded that India did 
not have the wherewithal to extend its influence in Southeast Asia. 
Nevertheless, when I visited India in 1970, I asked her whether India 
intended to extend its naval interests into Southeast Asia. Their foreign 
minister, Swaran Singh, who was present, intervened to say India was 
interested in increasing economic ties but its greater interest was in keep­
ing its western sea lanes open. I sensed that India's primary defense con­
cern was Pakistan, fearing a U.S.-China-Pakistan line-up. 
When Morarji Desai became prime minister in 1977, I soon estab­
lished rapport with him. I had known him when he was India's deputy 
prime minister in 1969. During the London Commonwealth conference 
in June 1977, I lunched with him at his high commissioner's residence. 
He was in his eighties, a strict vegetarian who ate only raw nuts, fruit, 
and vegetables, nothing cooked. His meal that day consisted of raisins 
and nuts. The chocolates heaped in front of him were untouched. His 
high commissioner did not know of his strict diet. Even his milk had 
to come straight from a cow, not from a bottle. Indeed, at a regional 
Commonwealth conference in Sydney the following year, Australian 
Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser had a milk cow at hand. Desai assured me 
he had more than enough nourishment from his diet, that vegetarians 
were long-lived. He proved his thesis by living till age 99. He had a dry 
sense of humor and a capacious memory, but some unusual ideas. In De­
cember 1978, in the car taking us from Delhi airport to the Rashtrapati 
Bhavan, he said that thousands of years ago Indians had made a space 
journey and visited the planets, which the Americans were then doing. I 
must have looked skeptical, so he emphasized, "Yes, it is true. It is by 
reincarnation. It is recorded in the Bhagavad Gita. " 
Indira Gandhi lost the election of 1977 but was returned to power in 
1980. When I met her at the Commonwealth Heads of Government 
Regional Meeting (CHOGRM) in Delhi in September 1980, she had lost 
some steam. India's basic policies had not got off the ground. Its alliance 
with the Soviet Union prevented any close collaboration with the United 
States and Europe. This, plus a system dominated by inefficient state 
enterprises, not many private sector enterprises, and little foreign invest-
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 407 
ment had made India's economy limp along. Its achievement was to feed 
its huge population, growing faster than China's. 
When India in 1980 condoned the Vietnamese occupation of Cam­
bodia by recognizing the Vietnamese-installed regime, we became contes­
tants at international conferences. We were on opposite sides of an issue 
crucial to peace and stability in Southeast Asia. At the New Delhi 
CHOGRM that year, Indira Gandhi in her opening remarks as chairper­
son dismissed the value of condemning armed intervention across fron­
tiers. I quietly put the contrary view that the Vietnamese and Soviet occu­
pations of Cambodia and Afghanistan respectively were establishing a 
new doctrine of justifiable intervention outside the framework of the UN 
Charter, setting precedents for open and armed intervention. There were 
endless arguments between our officials on the drafting of the commu­
nique. The agreed draft avoided any mention of either the Soviet Union or 
Vietnam as aggressors, but did call for a political solution to uphold the 
independence and sovereignty of Afghanistan and Cambodia. In her clos­
ing remarks, she promised India would play its part to persuade people 
(in Moscow) to withdraw from Afghanistan. But on Cambodia, India rec­
ognized the regime because it controlled all major parts of the country, 
"one of the usual norms for recognition. " 
When she wrote to invite me to the 7th Non-Aligned Summit in 
Delhi scheduled for March 1983, I declined, stating, "In striving for true 
unity, the Non-Aligned Movement cannot be indifferent to the recent 
violations of the basic principles of national independence, integrity and 
sovereignty, particularly of its member states .... " 
But I did attend CHOGM, the full, not regional, Commonwealth 
meeting in Delhi later, in November 1983, when we again argued over 
Cambodia. Despite this sparring, because of our long association and 
good personal relations, there was no personal animus between us. 
Indira Gandhi was the toughest woman prime minister I have met. She 
was feminine but there was nothing soft about her. She was a more 
determined and ruthless political leader than Margaret Thatcher, Mrs. 
Bandaranaike, or Benazir Bhutto. She had a handsome face with an 
408 From Third World to First 
aquiline nose and a smart hairstyle with a broad streak of white against a 
jet black mass of hair combed back from her forehead. And she was always 
dressed elegantly in a sari. She affected some feminine ways, smiling 
coquettishly at men during social conversat ion; but once into the flow of 
an argument, there was that steel in her that would match any Kremlin 
leader. She was unlike her father. Nehru was a man of ideas, concepts he 
had polished and repolished-secular ism, multiculturalism, rapid indus­
trialization of the state by heavy industries in the fashion of the Soviet 
Union. Right or wrong, he was a thinker. 
She was practical and pragmatic, concerned primarily with the 
mechanics of power, its acquisition, and its exercise. A sad chapter in her 
many years in office was when she moved away from secularism, and to 
win the Hindi-H indu vote in North India, consciously or otherwise 
brought Hindu chauvinism tO the surface and allowed it tO become a 
legitimate force in Indian politics. It was to lead to the recurrence of 
Hindu-Muslim riots, the burning and destruction of the ancient mosque 
at Ayodhya, and the emergence of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), a 
Hindu chauvinist party, as the single major party in Parliament in 1996 
and again in 1998. She was at her toughest when the unity of India was 
threatened. There was outrage throughout the Sikh world when she 
ordered troops into the Sikh holy temple at Amritsar. Watching how 
incensed the Sikhs in Singapore were, I thought it was politically disas­
trous: She was desecrating the innermost sanctuary of the Sikh religion. 
But she was unsentimental and concerned only with the power of the 
state which she was determined to preserve. She paid for it with her life in 
1984, assassinated by her own Sikh bodyguards. 
Our divergent policies on Cambodia kept me away from India until 
March 1988, when I tried to establish contact with her son Rajiv Gandhi, 
then the prime minister. His deputy foreign minister, Natwar Singh, was 
with him-a sharp mind and a good presenter of difficult Indian posi­
tions. Rajiv suggested that the United States should establish diplomatic 
relations with Vietnam and stop its economic sanctions because he 
believed Vietnam intended to withdraw from Cambodia and focus on eco­
nomic reconstruct ion. He knew, as we did, that the Vietnamese were then 
in severe economic difficulties. Vietnam, I replied, had to pay a price for 
occupying Cambodia, but I hoped that in 10 years there would be a dif-
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 409 
ferent Vietnam, one which Singapore could work with and welcome as an 
economic partner. When there was a settlement in Cambodia, India and 
Singapore would again be on the same side. Both events did happen. 
After our discussions, Rajiv Gandhi and his wife Sonia gave Choo and 
me a private lunch at his residence. Rajiv was a political innocent who 
had found himself in the middle of a minefield. Because his mother had 
been assassinated in her own home, Rajiv's security cover was overpower­
ing. He said he found it oppressive but had learned to live with it. I saw 
him as an airline pilot with a straightforward worldview . In our discus­
sions, he often turned to Natwar Singh. I wondered who guided him 
through Indian politics but was certain many would want to hold his 
hand and lead him their way. 
Only a well-meaning prime minister would have sent Indian troops to 
Sri Lanka to put down a rebellion by Jaffna Tamils. These were descendants 
of Tamils who had left India over 1,000 years ago and were different from 
India's Tamils. Indian soldiers spilled blood in Sri Lanka. They withdrew 
and the fighting went on. In 1991, a young Jaffna Tamil woman 
approached him at an election rally near Madras, ostensibly to garland 
him, and blew them both up. It was not fair. His intentions had been good. 
In 1992, Narasimha Rao's minority Congress government was forced to 
change India's economic policies radically to comply with an IMF rescue 
package. Rao got on well with my prime minister, Goh Chok Tong, when 
they met at the Non-Aligned conference in Jakarta in 1992, and per­
suaded him to visit India with a delegation of Singapore businesspeople. 
His finance minister, Manmohan Singh, and his commerce minister, P. 
Chidambaram, visited Singapore to brief me on their changes in policy 
and attract investments from Singaporeans. Both ministers were clear on 
how to improve India's economic growth and knew what had to be done. 
The problem was how to get it done with an opposition that was xeno­
phobic on free enterprise, free markets, foreign trade, and investments. 
Rao visited Singapore in September 1994 and discussed India's open­
ing up with me. The most difficult obstacle, I said, was the mindset of 
Indian civil servants toward foreigners-that they were out to exploit 
India and should be hindered. If he wanted foreign investments to flow 
410 From Third World to First 
into India freely, as in China, they must change their mindsets and accept 
that it was their duty to facilitate, not regulate, the activities of investors. 
He invited me to visit India for a brainstorming session with his col­
leagues and his top civil servants. 
In January 1996, I visited Delhi and spoke to his civil servants at the 
India International Centre, and also to businesspeople from their three 
chambers of commerce, on the obstacles that blocked India's path to 
higher economic growth. In a separate one-on-one meeting with Rao, he 
acknowledged that age-old fears of Indians that economic reforms would 
lead to unequal distribution of wealth had made it difficult for him to 
proceed with further changes. He had injected large amounts of money to 
benefit the people but had been accused by his opposition of selling and 
mortgaging the country. He highlighted two social issues: India's slow 
rate of public housing because funds were lacking and its high birth rate. 
He wanted my prime minister to help him in his housing program. I had 
to dampen his high expectations that because of our successful housing 
program we could solve India's housing problems. Singapore could pro­
vide India with planning but they had to raise the resources to implement 
the plans themselves. 
When I met Rao in the 1980s, he was foreign minister in Indira 
Gandhi's government. He was of the generation of independence fighters, 
in his late seventies and on the verge of retirement. When Raj iv Gandhi 
was assassinated in 1991 in the middle of an election campaign, the 
Congress Party agreed on Rao as leader. A sympathy vote gave his party 
the largest number of seats, although short of a majority. Rao became 
prime minister and for the first two of five years carried out radical eco­
nomic reforms; but he was not an energetic young man chasing his own 
ideas. The impetus to the Indian economy came from Manmohan Singh, 
his finance minister, who ironically had started his career as a central 
planner. Rao did not have the conviction to persuade the people of India 
to support these reforms over the heads of an obstructive opposition. 
With slow economic but high population growth, India is not about 
to be a wealthy nation for some time. It has to solve its economic and 
social problems before it can play a major role in Southeast Asia. It is in 
Asean's interest to have India grow stronger and help maintain peace and 
stability on the Indian Ocean side of Southeast Asia. 
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 411 
India has so many outstanding people in all fields of scholarship, but 
for a number of reasons it has allowed the high standards the British left 
them to be lowered. There is less insistence now on meritocracy by exam­
inations for entrance into top schools and universities, the professions, 
and the Indian Civil Service (ICS). Cheating at examinations is rampant. 
Universities allot their quota of places to MPs of their state, who either 
give or sell these places to their constituents . 
The ICS in British days was selected from the creme de la creme of all 
India. An Indian had to be outstanding to be admitted into this elite 
British service. During one of my visits in the 1960s, I stayed at the 
Rashtrapati Bhavan. Before golf one morning, two Indian officers who had 
been members of the original JCS, not the IAS (Indian Administrative 
Service) which it had since become, came for breakfast. They were impres­
sive. One of them explained how a few hundred ICS officers governed 450 
million Indians in British India and governed well. He spoke with nostal­
gia of the quality of the men selected for the ICS, and regretted that the 
entrance examinations, which used to be conducted only in English, could 
now be taken in English or in Hindi. Populist pressures had lowered stan­
dards of recruitment and had also led to poorer communications within the 
service. 
It was a gradual slide in quality of a once elite service, now caught up 
in the throes of a social and economic revolution which had reduced liv­
ing standards. During the days of the British Raj, they had lived up to a 
certain lifestyle. Generals, admirals, air marshals, and senior ICS officials 
played golf. In the India of the 1960s and 1970s, they could not buy good 
(i.e., imported) golf balls because their import was forbidden. I remember 
one excursion to the Delhi Golf Club. Our high commission had advised 
me to bring several boxes of golf balls to distribute to the committee 
members of the club. It was depressing to see top brass and civil servants 
breaking up the packages and taking fistfuls of golf balls to stuff into 
their golf bags. 
Indeed, golf balls were so precious that caddies would dash into any 
house or rough to find them. Once, at the former Bombay Royal Golf 
Course in 1965, I sliced my ball into a squatter area and heard the loud 
clatter as it fell on a zinc roof. My caddie dashed off, I thought to find out 
who was hurt. But ne>--a little boy emerged with the golf ball, not to 
412 From Third World to First 
complain of injury but to bargain over the price of the ball. I was sad to 
see how the caddies had collected broken plastic and wooden tees, sharp­
ened their ends and reused them to tee up the balls of the players. In the 
locker rooms, bearers (menservants) put on and took off your socks and 
shoes. There were too many hands with too little work. 
Perhaps the fault lies in the system. India has wasted decades in state 
planning and controls that have bogged it down in bureaucrac y and cor­
ruption. A decentralized system would have allowed more centers like 
Bangalore and Bombay to grow and prosper. Another reason could be 
their caste system. It has been the enemy of meritocracy--each caste 
demands its quota in all institutions, whether recruitment into the IAS or 
entrance to the universities. A third reason is the endless conflicts and 
wars with Pakistan that make both poorer. 
The Delhi I visited in the 1960s was a big, sprawling city with many 
open spaces, not polluted and without too many squatters. The Delhi of 
the 1990s was an environmental mess. It was January and the air smelled 
foul with the fumes from coal burning in power stations and in homes. 
There were squatters everywhere. For security, they placed a whole com­
pany of soldiers in front of the Sheraton Hotel where I stayed. And traffic 
was clogged up. It was not the spacious capital it once was. 
By the time Narasimha Rao's Congress Party lost the election in 
1996, a 13-party coalition including several communist parties had come 
together to keep the Hindu nationalist BJP party out of power. Indian 
democracy had moved from its secular base. It was difficult to pursue fur­
ther liberalization of the economy. But the deeper problem was never 
solved. Prime Minister lnder Kumar Gujral in a public statement referred 
to the findings of a survey that India was the second most corrupt country 
in Asia. He said in 1997 to his Confederation of Indian Industry, "I some­
times feel ashamed, and I hang my head in shame when I am told that 
India is one of the ten most corrupt countries in the world." India is a 
nation of unfulfilled greatness. Its potential has lain fallow, underused. 
My first visit to Sri Lanka was in April 1956 on my way to London. I 
stayed at the Galle Face Hotel, their premier British-era hotel by the sea. 
I walked around the city of Colombo, impressed by the public buildings, 
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 413 
many with stone facing undamaged by war. Because Mountbatten had 
based his Southeast Asia Command in Kandy, Ceylon had more resources 
and better infrastructure than Singapore. 
That same year, Solomon West Ridgeway Dias Bandaranaike won the 
election as leader of the new Sri Lanka Freedom Party and became prime 
minister. He had promised to make Sinhalese the national language and 
Buddhism the national religion. He was a brown "pukka sahib," English­
educated and born a Christian ; he had decided on nativism and converted 
to Buddhism, and had become a champion of the Sinhalese language. It 
was the start of the unravelling of Ceylon. 
Singapore's then chief minister, Lim Yew Hock, invited me to meet 
him at dinner. A dapper little man, well-dressed and articulate, Bandar­
anaike was elated at having obtained an election mandate from the 
Sinhalese majority to make Ceylon a more nativist society. It was a reac­
tion against the "Brown Sahib" society-the political elite who on inher­
iting power had modeled themselves on the British, including their 
lifestyle. Sir John Kotelawala, the prime minister whom Bandaranaike 
succeeded, went horse riding every morning. Bandaranaike did not seem 
troubled that the Jaffna Tamils and other minorities would be at a disad­
vantage now that Sinhalese was the national language, or by the unease of 
the Hindu Tamils, the Muslim Moors, and the Christian Burghers 
(descendants of Dutch and natives) at the elevated status of Buddhism as 
the national religion. He had been president of the Oxford Union and he 
spoke as if he was still in the Oxford Union debating society. I was not 
surprised when, three years later, he was assassinated by a Buddhist monk. 
I thought it ironic that a Buddhist monk, dissatisfied with the country's 
slow rate of progress in making Buddhism the national religion, should 
have done it. 
In the election that followed, his widow, Sirimavo Bandaranaike, 
became prime minister on the sympathy vote. She proved to be a less vol­
uble but much tougher leader. When I met her in Ceylon in August 
1970, she was a determined woman who believed in the nonaligned ideol­
ogy. Ceylon favored the withdrawal of all U.S. troops from South 
Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, and a Nuclear-Weapons Free Zone in the 
Indian Ocean, free of big-power conflicts. As a younger man, I patiently 
explained my different foreign policy objectives, that Singapore would be 
414 From Third World to First 
gravely threatened if South Vietnam were to fall into the hands of the 
communists, threatening Cambodia, Laos, and Thailand. The insurgency 
would spread into Malaysia, with serious consequences for Singapore. We 
could not subscribe to this high-minded ideology when it had serious 
consequences for our future. Other great powers in the region, China and 
Japan, would in time expand their naval buildup. Therefore Singapore 
found it necessary to continue with the Five-Power Defence Agreement , 
which gave us some security. 
Her nephew, Felix Bandaranaike, was her eminence grise on interna­
tional affairs. Bright but not profound, he claimed good fortune of geog­
raphy and history had blessed Ceylon with peace and security so that only 
2.5 percent of its budget was spent on defense. I wonder what he would 
have said in the late 1980s when more than half its budget went into 
arms and the defense forces to crush the Jaffna Tamil rebellion. 
Ceylon was Britain's model Commonwealth country. It had been care­
fully prepared for independence . After the war, it was a good middle-size 
country with fewer than 10 million people. It had a relatively good stan­
dard of education, with two universities of high quality in Colombo and 
Kandy teaching in English, a civil service largely of locals, and experience 
in representative government starting with city council elections in the 
1930s. When Ceylon gained independence in 1948, it was the classic 
model of gradual evolution to independence . 
Alas, it did not work out. During my visits over the years, I watched 
a promising country go to waste. One-man-one-vote did not solve a basic 
problem. The majority of some 8 million Sinhalese could always outvote 
the 2 million Jaffna Tamils who had been disadvantaged by the switch 
from English to Sinhalese as the official language. From having no official 
religion, the Sinhalese made Buddhism their national religion. As 
Hindus, the Tamils felt dispossessed. 
In October 1966, on my way back from a prime ministers' conference 
in London, I visited Colombo to meet Prime Minister Dudley Senanayake. 
He was a gentle if resigned and fatalistic elderly man. When we played 
golf on the former Royal Colombo golf course, he apologized for the 
encroaching squatter huts and the goats and cows on the fairways. He said 
it was inevitable with democracy and elections; he could not justify keep­
ing these green open spaces in the center of the city. He sent me by train to 
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 415 
Nuwara Eliya, their once beautiful hill station. It was a most instructive 
lesson on what had happened after independence. The food on the train (in 
a special carriage) was poisonous. The crab was badly contaminated and 
stank. I went immediately to the restroom and spewed it all out. This 
saved me. In Nuwara Eliya, I stayed at the former British governor's hill 
residence, "The Lodge." It was dilapidated. Once upon a time it must have 
been well maintained , with roses (still some left) in the garden that looked 
like an English woodland. About 5,000 feet above sea level, it was pleas­
antly cool. I played golf on a once beautiful course; like the one in 
Colombo, this also was encroached upon by huts, goats, and cows. 
At dinner, a wise and sad-looking elderly Sinhalese explained that 
what had happened was inevitable with popular elections. The Sinhalese 
wanted to be the dominant race; they wanted to take over from the 
British as managers in the tea and coconut plantations, and from the 
Tamils who were the senior civil servants. They had to go through this 
tragedy of making Sinhalese the official language for which they had paid 
dearly, translating everything from English into Sinhalese and Tamil, a 
slow and unwieldy process. The universities taught in three languages: 
Sinhalese to the majority, Tamil to the Jaffna Tamils, and English to the 
Burghers. At the university in Kandy, I had asked the vice chancellor how 
three different engineers educated in three languages collaborated in 
building one bridge. He was a Burgher, and wore a Cambridge University 
tie so that I would recognize he had a proper Ph.D. He replied, "That, sir, 
is a political question for the ministers to answer." I asked about the 
books. He replied that basic textbooks were translated from English into 
Sinhalese and Tamil, always three to four editions late by the time they 
were printed. 
The tea plantations were in a deplorable condition. The locals who 
had been promoted were not as good supervisors as their British predeces­
sors. Without strict discipline, the tea pluckers were picking not only 
young shoots but also full-grown leaves, which would not brew good tea. 
Their coconut plantations had also suffered. It was, said the old Sinhalese, 
the price people had to pay to learn how to run the country. 
I did not visit Ceylon for many years, not until I had met their newly 
elected prime minister, Junius Richard Jayewardene, in 1978 at a 
CHOGR M conference in Sydney. In 1972, Prime Minister Sirimavo 
416 From Third World to First 
Bandaranaike had already changed the country's name, Ceylon, to Sri 
Lanka, and made it a republic. The changes did not improve the fortunes 
of the country. Its tea is still sold as "Ceylon" tea. 
Like Solomon Bandaranaike, Jayewardene was born a Christian, con­
verted to Buddhism , and embraced nativism to identify himself with the 
people. In his 70-odd years, he had been through the ups and downs of 
politics, more downs than ups, and become philosophical in his accep­
tance of lowered targets. He wanted to move away from Sri Lanka's social­
ist policies that had bankrupted it. After meeting me in Sydney, he came 
to Singapore, he said, to involve us in its development. I was impressed by 
his practical approach and was persuaded to visit Sri Lanka in April 1978. 
He said he would offer autonomy to the Tamils in Jaffna. I did not realize 
that he could not give way on the supremacy of the Sinhalese over the 
Tamils, which was to lead to civil war in 1983 and destroy any hope of a 
prosperous Sri Lanka for many years, if not generations. 
He had some weaknesses. He wanted to start an airline because he 
believed it was a symbol of progress. Singapore Airlines employed a good 
Sri Lankan captain. Would I release him? Of course, but how could an air­
line pilot run an airline? He wanted Singapore Airlines to help. We did. I 
advised him that an airline should not be his priority because it required 
too many talented and good administrators to get an airline off the 
ground when he needed them for irrigation, agriculture, housing, indus­
trial promotion and development, and so many other projects. An airline 
was a glamour project, not of great value for developing Sri Lanka. But he 
insisted. So we helped him launch it in six months, seconding 80 of 
Singapore Airlines' staff for periods from three months to two years, help­
ing them through our worldwide sales representation, setting up overseas 
offices, training staff, developing training centers, and so on. But there 
was no sound top management. When the pilot, now chairman of the new 
airline, decided to buy two second-hand aircraft against our advice, we 
decided to withdraw. Faced with a five-fold expansion of capacity, nega­
tive cash flow, lack of trained staff, unreliable services, and insufficient 
passengers, it was bound to fail. And it did. 
It was flattering to have Sri Lanka model their country after Singa­
pore. They announced that they would adopt the Singapore-style Area 
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 417 
Licensing Scheme to reduce traffic entering the city, but it did not work. 
They started a housing program in 1982 based on ours, but there was no 
adequate financing. They set up a free trade zone only slightly smaller 
than the area of Singapore that might have taken off but for the Tamil 
Tigers whose terrorist tactics scared investors away. 
The greatest mistake Jayewardene made was over the distribution of re­
claimed land in the dry zone. With foreign aid, he revived an ancient irriga­
tion scheme based on "tanks" (reservoirs) that could store water brought 
from the wet side of the mountains. Unfortunately, he gave the reclaimed 
land to the Sinhalese, not the Tamils who had historically been the farm­
ers of this dry zone. Dispossessed and squeezed, they launched the Tamil 
Tigers. Jayewardene's private secretary, a Jaffna Tamil loyal to him, told 
me this was a crucial mistake. The war that followed caused 50,000 
deaths and even more casualties, with many leaders assassinated. After 
more than 15 years, it shows no sign of abating. 
Jayewardene retired in 1988, a tired man. He had run out of solu­
tions. Ranasinghe Premadasa, who succeeded him, was a Sinhalese chau­
vinist. He wanted the Indian troops out of the country, which was not 
sensible. They were doing a nasty job for Sri Lanka. When the Indian 
troops left, he was in a worse position. He tried to negotiate with the 
Tamil Tigers and failed. He was not willing to give enough away. 
I met him on several occasions in Singapore after he became president 
and tried to convince him that this conflict could not be solved by force of 
arms. A political solution was the only way, one considered fair by the 
Jaffna Tamils and the rest of the world; then the Tamil United Liberation 
Front, the moderate constitutional wing of the Tamil home rule move­
ment, could not reject it. I argued that his objective must be to deprive 
the terrorists of popular support by offering the Tamils autonomy to gov­
ern themselves through the ballot box. He was convinced he could 
destroy them. In 1991 and 1992, he sent the Sri Lankan army to fight 
major battles against the Tamil Tigers. They did not succeed. In 1993, at 
a May Day parade, a suicide bomber approached him in a street proces­
sion. He and many others died. His successor, Sirimavo Bandaranaike's 
daughter, President Chandrika Kumaratunga, tried negotiation and war. 
She recaptured the Jaffna peninsula but did not destroy the Tamil Tigers. 
418 From Third World to First 
The fighting goes on. It is sad that the country whose ancient name 
Serendip has given the English language the word "serendipity " is now 
the epitome of conflict, pain, sorrow, and hopelessness. 
We established diplomatic relations with Pakistan in 1968 but for many 
years had little trade or other links. We did not share common positions 
in international affairs until the 1980s when the Afghan and Cambodian 
conflicts, both funded by the Soviet Union, brought us together. 
President Zia ul-Haq visited Singapore in 1982 as part of a tour of 
Southeast Asia. He told me his sole purpose in visiting Singapore was to 
meet me as the person responsible for modern Singapore. I gave him my 
standard reply, that modern Singapore was the work of a team. We dis­
cussed Inda-Pakistan relations. Singapore relations with India then were 
strained because of differences over Cambodia. I agreed with Zia that 
Soviet strategy and objectives had created the war in Afghanistan and 
Cambodia. 
He invited me to visit Pakistan, which I did in March 1988. He wel­
comed me in style as President Marcos had done in 197 4. Once our com­
mercial aircraft crossed the India-Pakistan border near Lahore, six F-16 
fighter planes escorted us to Islamabad. He mounted a huge guard of 
honor for inspection, a 19-gun salute, and hundreds of flag-waving chil­
dren and traditional Pakistani dancers to greet me at the airport. I was 
impressed to see Islamabad noticeably cleaner and better maintained than 
Delhi, with none of the filth, slums, and streets overflowing with people 
in the city center. Standards at their guesthouses and hotels were also 
higher. 
Zia was a heavyset man, with straight black hair carefully combed 
back, thick moustache, a strong voice, and a confident military manner. 
He was a strict Muslim and made Pakistan's military officers go dry like 
the rest of the country. As his guests, we were provided with locally 
brewed beer at the guesthouse. At dinner, Zia made an off-the-cuff speech 
to compliment me, not just on Singapore, but especially for standing up 
to the Western press. He had been following the Singapore government's 
exchanges with the Western media and cheered for us. He had suffered in 
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 419 
their columns and was delighted we were not taking it lying down. He 
conferred on me Pakistan's "Order of the Great Leader" (Nishan-I-Quaid-
1-Azam). 
In a press conference before departure, I praised President Zia for his 
courage in undertaking the dangers of giving logistics support to the 
Afghans. Had he been a nervous leader who preferred to look the other 
way, the world would have been worse off. Unfortunately, a few months 
later, before our relations could progress, Zia was killed in a suspicious 
plane crash. 
Ties with Pakistan again stagnated until Nawaz Sharif became prime 
minister in November 1990. He was a stout man of medium height, 
short for a Pakistani, already bald although only in his late forties. Unlike 
the Bhuttos, Nawaz Sharif came not from the landed property feudal elite 
but from a middle-class business family in Lahore. He had built up steel, 
sugar, and textile companies during the years when Pakistan was ruled by 
military leaders, including Zia ul-Haq. He visited Singapore twice in 
1991-in March, quietly, to study the reasons for our economic progress; 
in December, to ask me to visit his country and advise on the opening up 
of its economy. Pakistan, he said, had started on bold reforms, using 
Singapore as a model. 
He struck me as keen to change and make Pakistan more market­
oriented. I agreed to go the following year. At my request, he sent the 
secretary-general of his finance ministry, Saeed Qureshi, to Singapore to 
brief me. We met for three sessions of three hours each, to discuss facts 
and figures he had sent earlier. It was soon obvious that they faced dire 
and intractable problems. They had a low tax base, with income tax yield­
ing only 2 percent of their GDP. Many transactions in land sales were not 
documented and tax evasion was widespread. They subsidized agricul­
ture, railways, and steel mills. Defense took 44 percent of the budget, 
debt servicing 3 5 percent, leaving 21 percent to administer the country. 
Hence their budget deficits were 8 to 10 percent of their GDP and infla­
tion was reaching double-d igit figures. The IMF had drawn their atten­
tion to these parlous figures. The solutions were obvious but political will 
was difficult to exercise in a country without an educated electorate and 
with the legislature in the grip of landowners who controlled the votes of 
420 From Third World to First 
their uneducated tenant farmers. This made land and tax reforms near 
impossible. Corruption was rampant, with massive thievery of state prop­
erty, including illegal tapping of electricity. 
I spent a week in Pakistan from 28 February 1992. I had two meet­
ings with Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and his key cabinet colleagues, 
including his finance and economics minister, Sartaj Aziz, an irrepressible 
optimist. After I returned, I sent Nawaz Sharif a report together with a 
personal letter to summarize the actions he should take. 
He was a man of action with much energy. He sympathized with the 
plight of taxi drivers and lowered taxes for taxis even though that raised 
problems of fairness to other car buyers. His business background made 
him believe in private enterprise as the solution for slow growth and he 
was eager to privatize state enterprises. But in Pakistan they were not sold 
by inviting open tenders. Friendship, especially political ones, deter­
mined who got what. He always believed that something could be done 
to make things better. The problem was that often he liad neither the 
time nor the patience to have a comprehens ive study made before decid­
ing on a solution. On balance, I believed he was better able to govern than 
Benazir Bhutto, the leading opposition leader who was later to succeed 
Nawaz Sharif. He knew more about business, with or without patronage, 
than either she or her husband, Asif Zadari. 
On my journey home, I stopped in Karachi to meet Benazir Bhutto. 
She was full of venom for Nawaz Sharif and President Ghulam Ahmed 
Khan. She said her party had been unfairly treated; the government had 
tried to discredit her and her party by prosecuting her colleagues and her 
husband. The corrupt police were abetting the government, and a troika 
of the military, the president , and the prime minister ran the country. She 
also claimed she had started their current push for deregulation and had 
passed the legislation for privatization. 
Nawaz Sharif visited Singapore in December 1992 on his way home 
from Japan. He wanted me to make a followup visit to assess progress in 
implementing my recommendations. He had privatized 60 percent of tar­
geted enterprises and foreign investments had increased. Again Saeed 
Qureshi briefed me. I discovered many of my recommendations had not 
been implemented. I had feared this would happen. Before I could visit 
Islamabad again, confrontation between President Khan and Prime 
South Asia's Legends and Leaders 421 
Minister Nawaz Sharif led to the resignation of both and fresh elections . 
Benazir Bhutto became prime minister. 
Shortly after the election, I met Benazir Bhutto in Davos in January 
1994. She was elated and full of ideas. She wanted Singapore to partici­
pate in a road project from Pakistan to Central Asia going through 
Afghanistan. I asked for a detailed proposal for us to study. She also 
wanted us to look into the viability of sick enterprises in Pakistan and 
take them over. Her husband was even more ebullient. He was going to 
build an island off Karachi to develop as a free port and a free trade zone 
with casinos. It was totally uneconomic. Pakistan had so much unused 
land, what need was there to build an island? Their approach was simple: 
Singapore was successful, had lots of money, and therefore could invest in 
Pakistan and make it as successful. 
In March 1995, Bhutto and her husband visited Singapore. She said 
she had heeded my advice in Davos and ensured that all her proposals had 
been well thought through. She invited Singapore to transfer its labor­
intensive industries to Pakistan. I said she would first have to convince our 
businesspeople. When investors saw on television every night Muslims 
killing other Muslims in Karachi with heavy weapons and bombs, they 
must ask themselves, why should they be involved? I did not visit 
Pakistan. She was dismissed from office in 1996 by Leghari, a president she 
herself had appointed. Nawaz Sharif won the subsequent election in 
February 1997, to return as prime minister. 
Pakistan's deep economic and political problems remained. Too much 
of their budget went into defense. Their politics continued to be poisoned 
by implacable animosities between the leaders of the two main parties. 
Asif Ali Zadari was charged with the murder of his wife's brother, 
Murtaza Bhutto. And husband and wife were both charged for corruption 
involving vast sums of money, some of which was traced to Switzerland. 
To compound Pakistan's problems, in May 1998, India conducted 
several nuclear explosions. Two weeks later, Pakistan conducted its own 
tests. Both were economically stretched, Pakistan more than India. When 
I met Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif during his visit to 
Singapore in May 1999, he assured me that he had had good discussions 
with India's Prime Minister Vajpayee the previous month and that nei­
ther side intended to deploy missiles with nuclear warheads. He ventured 
422 From Third World to First 
the view that because both had nuclear capabilities, an all-out war 
between them would no longer be possible. It is an outcome devoutly to 
be wished. 
The Pakistanis are a hardy people with enough of the talented and 
well-educated to build a modern nation. But unending strife with India 
has drained Pakistan's resources and stunted its potential. 
26. Following Britain into Europe 
My views of the Europeans had been much influenced by British attitudes 
of the 1950s and 1960s. The Europeans seemed different and somewhat 
strange, not as cohesive as nations nor as constitutional-minde d as the 
British: The French were prone to riots and revolutions and the overturn­
ing of constitutions; the Germans tended to use force to settle disputes. 
But once Harold Macmillan as prime minister made his bid in 1962 to 
join the European Economic Community (EEC, now the European 
Union) and was rebuffed, I believed it was only a matter of time before a 
second application or a third would succeed. After Britain announced its 
withdrawal from east of Suez in 1968, Prime Minister Harold Wilson 
made an overture to President Charles de Gaulle. Again it failed, but it 
underlined how important Europe had become for Britain. 
Britain wanted to join to get out of its recurring economic difficulty 
of slow growth compared to the faster growth of Germany, France, the 
Benelux countries, and even Italy-all members of the EEC. It was clear 
that the larger market spurred growth. I wanted to build ties with this 
new Europe and not have Singapore shut out when Britain joined. 
As with most bureaucratic organizations, statements of principle 
from the top are no assurance of a smooth relationship . I encountered pro­
tectionist policies of "Fortress Europe" in the 1970s over our exports. In 
October 1977, I went to Brussels to see the president of the European 
Commission, Roy Jenkins, with whom I had kept in touch since the 
1960s when he was British chancellor of the exchequer. I had written to 
424 From Third World to First 
him earlier that their application to Singapore of GSP rules (the General 
Scheme of Preferences which gave developing countries limited import 
duty-free entry) had caused problems for our exports of electronic calcula­
tors, umbrellas, projectors, and plywood. Recently, even fresh orchids 
were meeting objections from Dutch and Italian flower growers. I added 
that I had expected problems with textiles and umbrellas but not with 
electronic calculators and fresh orchids. Jenkins was sympathetic and 
promised to look into this, but he could do nothing about the umbrellas. 
It seemed they were produced in President Giscard d'Estaing's con­
stituency. 
With the other commissioners , I discussed how to avoid manufactur­
ing those products that the EEC countries would find sensitive because of 
persistent high unemployment. I discovered to my dismay that the list 
was unlimited. Any member country with any influence on Brussels, feel­
ing the slightest pain, could appeal to Brussels for protection and would 
invariably get it. Yet the EEC denied it was the most protectionist of all 
the trading blocs. I cited the experience of Philips and Siemens, two 
of the best-known European MNCs; they had found it more difficult 
to export their Singapore-made electronic products to Europe than to 
America and Asia. 
I raised two matters: first, that "graduation" leading to the removal of 
GSP benefits should not be applied prematurely to Singapore ; and sec­
ond, that selective safeguards blocking imports were unlikely to be effec­
tive in solving EEC problems. I tried to convince Jenkins, as president of 
the EEC, that he should formalize the promising EEC-Asean relationship 
in an agreement for economic cooperation, and that a visit by him to the 
countries of Asean would put the imprimatur of the commission on this 
goal. Instead, he sent Viscount Davignon, the commissioner of industrial 
affairs. Jenkins was not fond of travelling to the East, whose prospects he 
did not rate highly. Finally, with the help of the German foreign minister, 
Hans-Dietrich Genscher, Asean succeeded in getting the EEC to sign an 
agreement in 1980 for a Joint Cooperation Committee to promote and 
review activities. Asean countries, however, still faced endless protection­
ist problems with this multimember organization. Its agricultural subsi­
dies and tariffs worked against palm oil exports; its health and safety reg­
ulation on rubber products and eco-labelling and other forms of labor 
Following Britain into Europe 425 
and environmental standards effectively checked Asean exports. As for 
Singapore, in 1986, as part of its review of the GSP privileges, the EEC 
imposed a quota on Singapore ball bearings. 
European MNCs were less agile and dynamic than the Americans and 
Japanese. They were missing the opportunities for global integrated pro­
duction, manufacturing different components of a product in different 
countries. That was the situation in the 1980s and it was still largely true 
in the 1990s. 
To establish ties with the French who were the moving spirit behind the 
EEC, I arranged in May 1969 to meet President de Gaulle whom I had 
long admired as a great leader. Just before the visit, French students took 
to the streets and demanded constitutional reforms and more university 
places, in fact challenging de Gaulle's legitimacy. The visit was post­
poned. De Gaulle called a referendum, lost it, and retired. I never got to 
meet this stern, tall, unbending man who had restored French pride in 
themselves and their country, and whose autobiography impressed me 
even in an English translation. 
Instead I met his successor, Georges Pompidou, in September 1970. 
He was friendly and jovial, a man who enjoyed an exchange with a visitor 
from a strange faraway place called Singapore. He emphasized that France 
was more than just high fashion in clothes, exotic perfumes, and great 
wines. He wanted French quality chemicals, high-tech machinery , engi­
neering, and aircraft to be the image the world had of 1970s France. He 
had a philosophical bent and engaged me for 20 minutes on Asian atti­
tudes toward gold. Would it still be highly priced and treasured if it 
became no more than a commodity and no longer a backing for currency? 
I was strongly of the opinion that it would. Over the millennia, historical 
experience of devastation and famine caused by drought, floods, wars, and 
other calamities had taught the Chinese people the value of gold, inde­
structible, immutable, and fungible. The three-and-a-half year Japanese 
occupation of Singapore was a recent reminder. I told him that with one 
tahi/ (slightly more than one ounce) of gold, regardless of hyper-inflation, 
you could feed a family for a month as well as buy medicine and other 
essentials. My account seemed to confirm his own beliefs. I said it was a 
426 From Third World to First 
primeval instinct in man. His interpreter, Prince Andronik ov, a French 
Russian emigre, translated this as primiti f I protested, "No, primeval, 
going back to earliest times." The interpreter looked coldly at me to say, 
"Yes, in French primeval is primitif." I felt duly chastened . 
Valery Giscard d'Estaing was elected president in May 1974, succeed­
ing Pompidou. I was in Paris on a private visit but he received me within 
a few days of his election. It was a good meeting for over an hour at the 
Elysee Palace. Unlike Pompidou, who knew English but insisted on 
speaking in French, President Giscard decided to use English. Tall, with a 
long patrician face, a bald high dome of a skull, he spoke with a strong 
French accent, choosing his words carefully and with great precision. 
He was very French in his approach, cerebral, logical, and systematic : 
Why did Singapore develop and not the others, what was missing in the 
others? I could only tell him what I thought were three primary reasons: 
first, stability and cohesion in society; second, a cultural drive to achieve 
and a thrifty, hardworking people always investing in the future, with 
high savings for a rainy day and for the next generation; third, a great rev­
erence for education and knowledge. He was not satisfied that that was 
the complete answer. 
Giscard's prime minister, Jacques Chirac, had a totally different set of 
interests. He did not spend time on philosophical discussion about what 
was happening in Asia but wanted to know what more could be done 
between France and Singapore. I tried to interest him not just in Singa­
pore but in the wider region, using Singapore as the stepping stone. It 
took another 10 years, under a different president and after several prime 
ministers, before I convinced the French government and entrepreneurs 
that Southeast Asia was a promising part of the world to invest in. 
Raymond Barre succeeded Jacques Chirac as prime minister in 
August 1976. Barre, a rotund man of medium height, was a professor of 
economics and a sympathetic listener. He favored the establishment of 
French joint ventures and investments abroad. He supported my proposal 
to develop Singapore into a technological servicing center and said that 
France could cooperate with us in sales and services in the region. He pro­
posed a five-year Singapore-France bilateral cooperation agreement on 
trade, investments, technical assistance, and cultural cooperation with 
specific set targets. He was practical and systematic in tackling problems, 
Followin g Britain into Europe 427 
keen on results. But his French industrialists were not ready for this 
enterprise. I spoke to a group of them in the French National Employers ' 
Federation (CNPF). At the end of an hour's discussion, their spokesman 
told the press that investors were aware of the opportunities in Singapore 
but many appeared disinclined to get up and go "as it is too far away and 
English-speaking, " adding that France could not be everywhere as it was 
concentrating on Africa. Indeed, the French were focused on Francophone 
Africa. Even in Asia, they were drawn toward Vietnam, believing it 
would still be French-speaking and French-inclined. It was not until the 
mid-l 980s, when a socialist President Mitterrand and his Gaullist prime 
minister, Jacques Chirac, both decided that Africa was not as ready for 
development as Asia, that my efforts came to fruition. 
In July 1981, on my way to London to attend the wedding of Prince 
Charles, I stopped in Paris hoping to meet the newly elected president, 
Frarn;ois Mitterrand. But the Quai d'Orsay, the French foreign office, was 
starchy and did not approve of a stopover visit. The president was busy, 
but as he also was going to the wedding, he would meet me in London at 
the residence of their ambassador. To soften the rebuff, Prime Minister 
Pierre Mauroy gave me lunch. 
At my departure from Paris, I was driven speedily through heavy 
traffic, escorted by their police outriders from my hotel to Charles de 
Gaulle Airport. It was a beautiful summer's day. The expressways lined 
with trees and the embankments covered with creepers were a glorious 
sight. Charles de Gaulle Airport was modern and efficiently laid out. 
Then I arrived in Heathrow , all higgledy-piggledy; a labyrinth of road­
ways took me from the plane to the VIP lounge, then out to scruffy streets 
with roundabouts and grass verges unkempt and overgrown with weeds, 
on to my Knightsbridge hotel. The contrast between Paris and London 
was stark. 
My mind went back to my first visit to Paris in June 1948 with 
Choo. It was a scruffy, down-at-heel, postoccupation city, a poor relation 
compared to bomb-scarred but neat and tidy London, a city of confident 
people, proud of their record of standing up to the Nazis and saving 
humankind from tyranny. I remembered also the chaos in Paris in May 
1958 just before Charles de Gaulle came back as president to form the 
Fifth Republic. Through his culture minister, Malraux, he cleaned up 
428 From Third World to First 
Paris, scrubbed the soot from the buildings, and made it a city of lights. 
They restored French pride and injected fresh hope, while London mud­
dled on as the British economy stumbled from one crisis to the next. I 
believed there were advantages in revolutionary change as against 
Britain's slow and gradual constitutional evolution. The British held end­
less meetings over new airports around London including Stansted and 
Gatwick, all leading to nothing, as planning authorities were stymied by 
local interests determined to preserve their amenities at the price of the 
nation's progress. Even after the Thatcher years, Heathrow still stands as 
an ancient monument to symbolize a lack of dare and dash. 
Of the French leaders I met, the most perceptive in assessing political 
trends and the nature of different societies was President Mitterrand. He 
talked about the threat posed by the aggressive intervention of Soviet 
forces in Afghanistan. He conceded the Soviets had had successes in 
Vietnam and the Middle East, particularly Syria, but its influence every­
where else had declined. They had given a lot of arms but had few friends. 
He was confident that, united, the West had the ability to restore the 
general balance of power. 
During his first two years as president, with Pierre Mauroy as prime 
minister, Mitterrand followed standard socialist policies. He lowered 
interest rates, expanded credit to mop up unemployment, and national­
ized several major industries and banks. The French economy suffered. 
Old as he was, in his seventies, Mitterrand's ideology was not set in stone. 
He changed his prime minister and pursued more conventional economic 
policies to control money supply and inflation, and restored steady if 
unspectacular growth. One achievement of his 14 years as president was 
to educate the French socialists and make them a party of government. 
We had a more substantial discussion for over an hour in September 
1986 when his Concorde made a refuelling stop at Changi Airport. 
Protocol did not require me to meet him, but I had found him a serious 
man. His was a tour d'horizon. With great insight, Mitterrand said that the 
Soviet empire was in such a state that one mere accident would be enough 
to split central Europe from the Soviet Union, that Soviet control was 
based on a balance of power that had been in its favor. However, history 
had shown that the balance always shifted and the ideological power of 
the Soviet Union was beginning to decline. A third generation of commu-
Following Britain into Europe 429 
nists believed that they could benefit from the experience of the Western 
world, and this was causing weaknesses in the Soviet system. 
He wholeheartedly agreed with me that Europe would be a much 
stronger force in international affairs if it could speak in one voice. This 
was his great ambition-a Europe of 320 million with great technologi­
cal capabilities. He believed English and French could serve as common 
languages in Europe, with French equally powerful. But the unification 
had to be a slow process. If it were a question of survival, Europe would 
undoubtedly be totally united. On the other hand, Europe would always 
resist being swallowed by the American civilization ; it would fight to 
maintain its distinct European identity. Americanization, with its fast 
foods, pop music, and movies, was invading the basic European lifestyles. 
He asked about the Cambodian situation, which he said appeared 
frozen. I disagreed with his view because there was now cause for opti­
mism. Communism had been checked in the region, having reached its 
peak when North Vietnam captured Saigon. Since then, the emptiness of 
the communist system, Vietnam's invasion and occupation of Cambodia, 
and its own grinding poverty had destroyed the image of idealism that 
communism had hitherto projected. Mitterrand was surprised to learn 
that living standards in Vietnam were so dreadfully low that, as I told 
him, they were happy to get food parcels from relatives in America and 
France. The Vietnamese, I said, had made a grievous strategic error in 
fighting China. By continuing its occupation of Cambodia, Vietnam had 
to forego economic growth while the Asean countries were forging ahead. 
Vietnam was already one generation behind Asean, and by the time they 
found a solution to their Cambodian burden, they would be lagging by 
two generations. 
I met Mitterrand again on an official visit in May 1990. He came out 
to the steps of the Elysee to greet me, an honor our ambassador noted. He 
again expressed surprise at the failure of the Vietnamese who were "coura­
geous, imaginative and resourceful people." I added that the Vietnamese 
knew that they were able and could see that the Thais who were less hard­
working and less organized were the more successful, that it was their sys­
tem that was at fault. To put right the system, they would need a genera­
tion change at the top. Could there be a grassroots movement in Vietnam 
to overthrow the system as had happened in Eastern Europe? I did not 
430 From Third World to First 
think so, because Vietnam had a long-established tradition of emperors 
and strong leaders. 
Mitterrand returned to the subject of the collapse of the Soviet empire 
and with uncanny prescience predicted the reemergence of "all sorts of 
nationalistic forces that had long been suppressed. " 
One able French prime minister was Edouard Balladur who led a 
Gaullist government that cohabited with socialist President Mitterrand. 
We had met on several previous occasions. His diplomatic adviser had 
been ambassador in Singapore and a friend, so I knew Balladur was a man 
of considerable ability. I was surprised, therefore, that he had some 
strange theories about trade. In his office, with note takers, he expounded 
his theory that liberalization for free trade could take place only between 
countries of similar social and economic structures, otherwise the differ­
ences could lead to distortions and unfair competition. He gave as exam­
ple the French textile industry, which would be lost in another 10 to 15 
years because of competition from China, Taiwan, and South Korea. I dis­
agreed with him and argued that protection of any country's industry was 
no longer possible except at great cost. Companies were global in reach, 
an irreversible result of progress in technology, especially in global com­
munications. Firms sourced material from one country, used labor from 
another, set up production plants in a third, and marketed their products 
in a fourth. 
Although he agreed with my views in general, he could not help but 
take a protectionist position, because of fears over the loss of jobs when­
ever companies relocated their production plants out of France. He agreed 
that economic competition should be honest and fair, adding that Japanese 
car manufacturers did not compete fairly as they possessed certain advan­
tages. I found this an eccentric and odd explanation from a man of un­
doubted intellect. 
A similar view was put to me by Jacques Chirac when, as mayor of Paris, 
he met me in Singapore at the end of 1993. He had read the speech I 
made at the Asahi Forum that October when he was in Tokyo. He found 
my proposition that Europe was protectionist absurd. Europe was the 
most open market in the world with the lowest tariffs. The real protec-
Following Britain into Europe 431 
tionists, he argued, were Japan and the United States. It was unfair to 
blame France or the European Commission for blocking the Uruguay 
Round negotiations because it refused to give up Europe's Common 
Agricultural Policy. I countered that if there were no free trade, then the 
world must prepare for another war. The Chinese had built their ancient 
empire because they needed to establish order over a wide expanse ofter­
ritory and its many peoples so that goods and services could be exchanged 
freely within their empire. When all parts of the globe were carved up 
into various empires as before World War II, war resulted from competi­
tion for more raw materials, more markets, and more wealth. 
We next discussed French agriculture and the Uruguay Round. I had 
listened to a BBC program on the plight of the French farmers and how 
the French countryside had suffered. But this was part and parcel of the 
technological revolution. French farmers could not be protected forever 
and ever to keep their way of life unchanged. Chirac retorted that France 
needed to protect its agriculture, but he wanted me to know that he 
shared my views on free trade. For its own long-term interest, there was 
no way other than free trade, hence France was the least protectionist. 
I quoted former GATT Director General Arthur Dunkel as an expert 
witness that France was protectionist. The then director general, Peter 
Sutherland, also said so. Chirac interjected to say that he had no confi­
dence in Sutherland. I said the EEC president, Jacques Delors, had confi­
dence in Sutherland, to which Chirac promptly replied that he had no 
confidence in Delors as well! 
Chirac said we could not convince each other, so it was best if we 
agreed to disagree. In the end, he did move the position of Balladur's gov­
ernment so that a settlement was reached on the Uruguay Round. Since 
we first met in 1974, Chirac and I had become friends and could talk 
freely and frankly to each other without giving or taking offense. 
I was struck by the deep interest both Chirac and the German chancellor, 
Helmut Kohl, had in China and East Asia. I discussed this with Prime 
Minister Goh Chok Tong and suggested that he launch an initiative for 
regular meetings between leaders of the European Union (EU) and East 
Asia. The Americans had regular meetings with East Asia through APEC, 
432 From Third World to First 
and with the EU through many organizations. But the EU and East Asia 
had no formal meetings that could foster trade, investments, and cultural 
exchanges. Goh took it up with French Prime Minister Edouard Balladur, 
and the first Asia-Europe meeting of leaders was held in Bangkok in 
February 1996. Visiting Asian countries on their way to or after that 
meeting, many European leaders discovered the extent of the East Asian 
industrial transformation, and decided on biennial meetings of EU and 
East Asian leaders. 
My first encounter with Germans was at the Frankfurt airport in April 
1956. The British Overseas Airways Corporation "Argonaut" had stopped 
in Rome where I heard mellifluous if languid announcements over the 
loudspeakers as Italian porters trundled baggage leisurely. On arrival at 
Frankfurt a few hours later, I felt the air appreciably cooler and crisper, as 
if to match the peremptory Achtung-Achtung over the loudspeakers, fol­
lowed by instructions that were compelling and insistent as German 
porters briskly went about their business. It reminded me of the differ­
ence between the German and Italian armies described in dispatches from 
the battle fronts of World War II. I had read them in reports carried by 
Allied news agencies when I was editing their cables during the Japanese 
occupation. 
I visited Willy Brandt in Bonn in September 1970 when he was the 
German chancellor. We had met earlier in Brussels, in 1964, during the 
centennial of the Socialist International. After my speech at that meeting, 
he came up and sympathized with me over the communal riots in 
Singapore that had been organized by supporters of the central govern­
ment out to intimidate the Chinese. He invited me to visit him. I likened 
Singapore to a West Berlin without the advantage of the Federal Republic 
of Germany to back it. As a former mayor of West Berlin he understood 
my predicament. He was the most sympathetic of all European leaders to 
Singapore's plight. I tried to convince him not to write off Southeast Asia 
because I was confident we would overcome the communist insurgencies 
threatening so many countries in the region. Brandt was attractive-tall 
Following Britain into Europe 433 
and broad-framed, with a friendly, handsome face and a good voice. He 
was more visceral than cerebral in his reactions. Perhaps he allowed his 
heart to rule his head. He was a good old-fashioned socialist, always in 
favor of equalizing opportunities and rewards. 
Helmut Schmidt, who took over from Brandt in 1974, was clear­
headed and tough-minded, with definite views on all key issues. He had 
contempt for the equivocation on East-West issues of developing coun­
tries' leaders who were afraid to criticize the Soviet Union. Having been 
defense minister, then finance minister, as chancellor he had a thorough 
grasp of economic, defense, and strategic issues. 
He and his wife, Loki, visited Singapore in October 1978. In the 
three days they spent here, we took the measure of each other and found 
much common ground. When we recorded a television interview for a 
German television station, the interlocutor was surprised that we seemed 
to think and talk alike on so many issues. 
I proposed to Schmidt that he set up a German-Singapore Institute to 
run courses on advanced manufacturing and information technology, to help 
German businesses set up in the region. He agreed. The institute turned out 
to be of great benefit to German investors who were able to recruit techni­
cians trained to German standards. Later, Singapore became host for the 
training of other Third World workers at this institute. 
After my visit to Bonn and Berlin the following autumn, I wrote in a 
note to the cabinet: 
Berlin looked more prosperous than in 1970, my last visit. But it 
lacked the relaxed and free spirit of Bonn. The communists have a 
choker on the people of West Berlin. They stifled the vibrancy of 
life, not enough to give cause for protest, or to make newspaper 
headlines, but enough of a constant and nagging pressure to 
remind Germans generally that they have hostages in West 
Berlin. As I passed the Russian war memorial with their guards 
standing like statues, I was reminded that they were suppliers of 
weapons which were causing so much suffering in Indochina and 
threatening Thailand. Without the flow of these weapons, there 
would be no Vietnamese troops in Cambodia nor Cambodian 
refugees in Thailand .... Our saving grace is that their system is 
434 From Third World to First 
so damnably inefficient in providing the goods and services the 
people want. Regimentation has left their people shabbier in 
spirit and poorer in everything, except the capacity to make war. 
This inferiority, over time, will become increasingly clear to 
everyone including their own people. If the West does not give 
the Soviets any opportunity to exploit their military superiority, 
their system will be under profound stress by the 1990s. 
So it turned out. 
I next met Schmidt in Bonn in January 1980, after the Soviet inva­
sion of Afghanistan. I was with a group of leaders, including Henry 
Kissinger, Ted Heath, and George Shultz, for a free-ranging discussion. 
We were unanimous that the Soviet Union had to be resisted at all costs 
and the Afghan people supported. 
Schmidt stepped down from office in 1982 because his Social 
Democrat Party (SPD) would not support the policies he thought neces­
sary to restore financial discipline. He remained active, writing in Die 
Zeit, a newspaper, and chairing conferences of the lnterAction Council, a 
group of former world leaders who met annually to discuss long-term 
world problems in a totally dispassionate and nonpartisan manner. I 
became a member of his group after I stood down from office in 1990. 
Schmidt's successor, Helmut Kohl, was a giant of a man, probably the 
largest and tallest leader in the world then. On my visit to Bonn in May 
1990, he was eloquent on German reunification, then about to happen. It 
had to happen, he said, and in the context of European unity. He was con­
fident and optimistic that he could manage the costs and problems of 
reunification. He dismissed any suggestion of a "Fortress Europe." 
Germany would not condone protectionism and he was confident the 
German industry w:mld be able to compete against the Japanese. 
I expressed concern that German reunification would consume so 
much resources, energy, and manpower that there would be little left over 
for the Asia Pacific region. He assured me that he would not lose interest 
in East Asia. He was most conscious that a reunified Germany, with some 
20 million East Germans added to 60 million West Germans, would raise 
fears among its neighbors. He said that everybody wanted a united 
Following Britain into Europe 435 
Germany to remain in NATO, and although their motives for wanting 
this were not always "friendly," the end result was positive: "European 
unity and German unity are two sides of the same medallion. " 
He had equally strong views on China. There were many dummkoe pfe 
(blockheads) in the Federal Republic of Germany who wanted to isolate 
China because of Tiananmen. It was the wrong approach. He agreed with 
Singapore's policy of engaging China. China wanted a foot in Europe, par­
ticularly in Germany, which had the highest number of Chinese students 
in Europe, and they would be the future modernizers of China. 
Unlike the French, German industries and banks had been active in 
Singapore and the region from the early 1970s, long before Chancellor 
Kohl developed a personal interest. After the Dutch, the Germans were 
the largest single European investor in Singapore, and our largest 
European trading partner. Kohl visited Singapore in February 1993, two 
and a half years after German reunification. He admitted the cost of inte­
grating East Germany was more than he had expected. Nevertheless he 
was accompanied by over 40 top German industrialists. I urged him not 
to leave East Asia to the Americans and the Japanese. Germany, Kohl 
said, was essentially outward-looking. He wanted more economic and 
cultural links with the area. He invited me to visit Germany to keep in 
touch. He wanted Singapore and German entrepreneurs to invest together 
in China, Vietnam, and other East Asian markets. I visited him in May 
1994 to keep him abreast of events. He also spoke of Russia, that the 
European Union was not treating the leaders in Moscow with the respect 
that was due. The Russians were a proud people and felt belittled and 
slighted by this. If the correct approach was not maintained, he was con­
vinced Russian nationalists and militarists would get back into power and 
"the whole cycle would start again." 
In November 1995, Kohl visited Singapore again and repeated his 
concern over Russia. His European partners did not understand that Russia 
was crucial to peace in Europe. They had to help Russia become stronger 
and more democratic and not go back to dictatorship and expansionism. 
Europe would need Russia as a balance against China. For these reasons, 
Germany was Russia's top aid donor with US$52 billion in 1989, more 
than half of all international assistance. He despaired of the Americans. 
436 From Third World to First 
They were becoming inward-looking. The Republicans were "as bad if not 
worse." No Republican candidate had been to Europe during a presidential 
election year as they had done in the years of the Cold War. 
He wanted my personal assessment to check against his official 
reports on China, Japan, Vietnam, Indonesia, Malaysia, India, Pakistan, 
Bangladesh, and the Philippines, and I gave him frank answers with no 
varnish. When I said that such and such a country was a hopeless case, he 
would concur to say he would not invest there. He was hard-headed and 
our assessments often matched. 
In June 1996, Kohl took Choo and me over the Rhine in a helicopter 
to visit Speyer, with its splendid eleventh-century cathedral, in his home 
state, Rhineland-Palatinate, in the heart of Europe. He had brought 
Mitterrand, Gorbachev, Thatcher, and others on this sentimental journey 
to the wine district of the Rhineland. His wife joined us at his favorite 
restaurant, Deidesheim Hof, where we tried some of his favorite dishes. 
During dinner he regaled me with accounts of his encounters with East 
Asian leaders he liked and some whom he found prickly. He found 
Suharto an unassuming man and they became close friends. Before he 
became chancellor, he had visited Suharto at his home. As he waited in 
the hall admiring fish in an aquarium, a man wearing a sweater and a 
sarong came out; together they watched the fish and then got into conver­
sation. The German ambassador who accompanied Kohl did not take 
notice of him. Only after some time did Kohl realize this was the presi­
dent himself. Suharto invited him to stay for lunch and they spent four 
hours together. On another occasion, Suharto took him to his farm to see 
his cattle, after which Kohl arranged for a German stud bull to be sent. 
The next time he met Suharto, the president shook his hand and said the 
bull had done a first-class job. 
Kohl showed that he placed little weight on form and much on sub­
stance when we travelled around Speyer, all six of us, not in Mercedes lim­
ousines, but in a Volkswagen people mover. When I gave him lunch in 
Singapore, he arrived in a tour coach, in order, he told me, to have a better 
and more comfortable view of the city. 
Helmut Schmidt and Helmut Kohl were not the best of friends and 
the German media were intrigued that I got along well with both. When 
they asked me, I replied it was my business to get on with whoever was 
Following Britain into Europe 437 
the leader of Germany, that I did not take sides. Kohl was often unfavor­
ably compared with Schmidt, his immediate predecessor. Schmidt is an 
intellectual, always tossing out interesting ideas which he expounded 
with trenchant force and clarity in Die Zeit after he retired as chancellor. 
Kohl, on the other hand, has been described by the media as dull and 
uninspiri ng. This led many co underestimate him. When he first came to 
power, no one expected him to become the longest-serving German chan­
cellor since Bismarck. When I got to know him better, beneath the out­
ward bulk and apparent clumsiness I discovered a good mind with keen 
political instinct. He was a strong character, resolute and consistent in 
pursuing his objectives. His great vision enabled him to come co terms 
with Germany's past and he was determined that the past would never 
again be repeated. Hence his single-minded pursuit of the European 
Monetary Union (EMU) which he referred co as a question of war and 
peace. He believed the Euro would make the process of European integra­
tion irreversible. 
Kohl lost the election in September 1998. He will go down in history 
as a great German who reunified Germany and as a greater European who 
wanted Germany as part of a supranational Europe to avoid the disastrous 
European wars of the last century. He consolidated Franco-German ties 
and set the Euro for a successful launch on 1 January 1999, despite much 
skepticism and opposition . The Euro weakened against the U.S. dollar in 
its first year. If the Euro eventually succeeds, Kohl's contribution co 
European unity will have been historic. His admission that he had man­
aged secret donations to his party that should have been declared, cannot 
diminish his contribution to Germany and the EU. 
French leaders impressed me by the quality of their intellect and political 
analysis. They had a greater ability than the Germans to project them­
selves onto the world stage, making use of the resources of the Germans in 
the European Community . A reunited Germany would challenge this 
arrangement. But Chancellor Kohl knew coo well the fears that could be 
aroused if Germany appeared to throw its weight. 
One serious obstacle to European cohesion and unity is the absence of 
a common language. Schmidt spoke to Giscard in English and told me 
438 From Third World to First 
they could establish a close rapport. Mitterrand and Chirac communi­
cated with Kohl through an interpreter. I have always found it difficult to 
feel the texture of another person's mind when an interpreter stood in 
between. Schmidt, Giscard, and Chirac all spoke to me in English and I 
could feel the grain of their thinking better than with Mitterrand and 
Kohl, who spoke through interpreters. When I had to wait for inter­
preters to tell me what they said, it was more difficult to read their body 
language. When a person speaks in English, even if it is not grammatical 
or idiomatic, I get the feel of the way his mind works. Pauses and hesita­
tions in the middle of a sentence sometimes change the nuance of a sen­
tence; an interpreter would have smoothed out these pauses and given me 
the substance without the wrinkles that would indicate the person's reser­
vations. Until the Europeans settle on a common language, they cannot 
equal the uniformity and the benefits of scale that America enjoys. Every 
EU country teaches English as the second language. None is prepared to 
give up its language for English or any other language. EU engineers and 
managers will therefore not be so easily interchangeable as Americans 
when working on major projects. 
French aspirations to have their language as one of the leading lan­
guages of international diplomacy have had to yield to pragmatism . By 
the late 1980s, French speakers at international conferences began to 
speak in English for greater impact on the international audience. With 
the Internet, the supremacy of the English language can be ignored only 
at a heavy price. It is common in the 1990s to listen to French and 
German CEOs having discussions in English. 
27. The Soviet Union : An Empire Implodes 
I was in Jesselton (now Kota Kinabalu) near the jungles of British North 
Borneo for a court case when news broke in October 195 7 that the 
Russians had sent a sputnik into space. It was a spectacular demonstration 
of the superiority of Soviet technology. I took the challenge of the com­
munist system seriously. The Soviets were aggressive everywhere in Asia 
and together with communist China were fueling guerrilla insurrections. 
They loomed even larger in my mind after they sent the first man into 
space in April 1961. It lent credence to their claim that history was on 
their side. 
I was curious to know what they were like as a people and took the 
opportunity to visit Moscow in September 1962 after a Commonwealth 
conference in London. I was given the standard official tour of Moscow 
including a night at the Bolshoi, where I watched Stravinsky on his first 
return to Russia conducting the orchestra for the ballet Petrushka. The 
officials insulated me from people in the streets, shops, and hotels and I 
met no one other than themselves . 
My lasting impression of Moscow and its officials is one of drabness 
and dourness. There was a babushka, exactly as I had read in books-a big, 
fat lady sitting outside the elevator on my floor of the National Hotel 
(their best, where Stravinsky was also staying), doing little else. They 
served me an enormous breakfast--caviar, smoked sturgeon, slabs of ham 
and meat, an assortment of bread, butter, coffee, tea, vodka, and cognac­
on a table covered with a dark velvet tablecloth. When I returned that 
440 From Third World to First 
night from the ballet, the food was still uncleared . And as I had been 
warned, the bathtub and washbasin had no stoppers. I had brought a solid 
rubber ball expressly for this purpose. It did not work for the washbasin 
but fortunately did for the bathtub. The Chaika car (a medium-size 
saloon) was dreadful. The officer who took me around was from the min­
istry of culture in charge of Southeast Asia, and the highest official I got 
to see was deputy foreign minister Kuznetsov. In Moscow, I had the 
impression of menace in the air, but that was perhaps my imagination . 
That the Soviets were a great power was a reality. 
I therefore encouraged my elder son, Loong, to study Russian, reason­
ing that since he was keen on mathematics, he could then read the publi­
cations of many excellent Russian mathematicians. I thought Russia was 
going to be a powerful influence in the lives of my children. Loong spent 
five years studying the language with a Czech emigre professor teaching 
at our Nanyang University, followed by the Tass correspondent, and then 
a succession of young Russians who were studying Chinese there. Finally 
a British diplomat taught him Russian for the 0-level examination, for 
which he got a distinction. 
Singapore established full diplomatic relations with Russia in 1968 
but contacts were minimal. They had nothing we wanted to buy except 
the catch of their fishing fleet that trawled the Indian and Pacific Oceans. 
They formed a joint venture with one of our companies to can their fish, 
and they also repaired their vessels in our dockyards and took on provi­
sions. The Soviets, however, were interested in Singapore because of its 
strategic location. This point was brought home to me during an enforced 
stopover in Moscow in January 1969. 
Choo and I were on our way to London, flying on Scandinavian 
Airlines System via Bangkok, Tashkent, and Copenhagen, when the pilot 
announced that the plane was unable to land at Tashkent because of 
weather conditions and had to land instead in Moscow. The weather 
looked fair as we flew over Tashkent. Waiting on the tarmac of Moscow 
airport were their foreign ministry officials with Ilia Ivanovich Safronov, 
the Russian ambassador-designate to Singapore. It was a freezing night. 
Choo slipped and nearly fell on the icy tarmac, quite unprepared for these 
conditions. My secretary shivered with the cold but warmed up in the 
VIP room with cognac. What they wanted from this elaborate exercise 
The Soviet Union: An Empire Implodes 441 
was for me to meet the man coming to Singapore as their first ambas­
sador. It was also a simple way to impress upon me their size, their might, 
and their reach. 
Safronov, who spoke Mandarin, had served in China and his duty 
obviously was to make a close study of the potential influence that China 
could muster in Singapore. Soon after he arrived in Singapore, he brought 
me an invitation from Prime Minister Aleksei Nikolayevich Kosygin to 
visit the Soviet Union. 
In September 1970, I arrived in Moscow past midnight on an Aeroflot 
flight from Cairo, to be welcomed by a guard of honor of tall Russian 
guardsmen under floodlights. They moved like robots and shouted back in 
unison when I was prompted to say "Hello" to them in Russian. The 
inspection of the guard of honor ended with the men marching past close 
to me in an intimidating show of aggressiveness and strength. It was 
designed to impress, and I was impressed. 
I called on a corpulent President Nikolai Podgorny at the Kremlin for 
discussions and lunch. He spoke of improving cultural and economic rela­
tions. A nondescript character, he left no impression on me. The next day, 
they flew us to Sochi then drove us from their guest dacha over two miles 
of a hilly road by the Black Sea to a large holiday home in Pitsunda, where 
a serious-looking but not unfriendly prime minister greeted us. Kosygin 
proudly showed us the facilities of his resort dacha, in particular his 
heated indoor pool with a large sliding door, which worked at the press of 
a button. I spent some two hours talking with him before dinner. 
Kosygin showed keen interest in the circumstances under which we 
had separated from Malaysia. He asked "whether Singapore had in fact 
made serious efforts to live together in the Federation." I assured him we 
had tried our best but that there was a fundamental difference in our 
political beliefs on communal issues and policies. He asked if he was right 
to assume that the idea of federation with Malaysia had not been aban­
doned. I referred to ties of geography and family between the two coun­
tries, but after the Kuala Lumpur May 1969 race riots, I did not think it 
was productive to talk about rejoining the Federation. The leaders there 
were suspicious of Singapore. He then asked about the support enjoyed by 
the communists (i.e., Maoists) in Singapore. I said this peaked at about 33 
percent in 1961-1962 and was now probably 15 percent. 
442 From Third World to First 
It was clear to me from his body language and his questions on the 
influence of Beijing on our Chinese-educated that he did not think an 
independent Singapore was in the Soviet interest. He referred pointedly 
co our military repair facilities used by U.S. aircraft and ships, and also 
the rest and recreation visits of U.S. servicemen from Vietnam. I coun­
tered that our repair facilities were open to all on a commercial basis. He 
was interested in using our dockyards and, with an eye to the former 
British naval facilities, said he hoped co expand bilateral relations in the 
political and economic fields. He was prepared co send all types of vessels, 
including Soviet warships, for repairs. His deputy minister for foreign 
trade would visit Singapore to assess the prospects of enhancing trade. 
He struck me as a man of some subtlety and gravitas. He did not raise 
the Soviet proposal for an Asian collective security system that President 
Podgorny had put to me in Moscow. Since I had shown no enthusias m, 
Kosygin simply said that they were both a European and an Asian coun­
try, and naturally interested in what went on in Southeast Asia, although 
some chose to deny them the right to be Asians. 
A foreign affairs officer who accompanied me, a China specialist, 
Mikhail S. Kapitsa, did most of the talking and probing throughout my 
visit. Soviet hospitality was overwhelming. On the aircraft from Moscow 
co Sochi, they served caviar, smoked sturgeon, vodka, and cognac soon 
after breakfast. When I said that British habits made me drink only tea in 
the morning, the liquor and food were removed. Their minister who 
accompanied us said he was also a tea drinker and sang its praises. 
I was impressed by the huge war memorial at Volgograd (Stalingrad 
during World War II) to commemorate their heroic defense of the city 
under siege. As a cable editor in Japanese-occupied Singapore, I had read 
war correspondents' dispatches during that long battle in 1943-1944. 
Magnificent wall bas-reliefs commemorated the many acts of bravery of 
Russian troops and civilians during the siege. Nearly as memorable were 
their war memorial and cemetery at Leningrad (now St. Petersburg). 
These were a brave, cough, and enduring people who had absorbed the 
heavy punishment the German Wehrmacht had inflicted, turned the 
tables on their enemy, and finally driven them all the way back co Berlin. 
Friendly and hospitable though they were, Choo and I suspected that 
our rooms were bugged. After dinner on our first night in Moscow, she 
The Soviet Unio n: An Empire Implodes 443 
said in our bedroom at the guest dacha, "Strange, they paid so much 
attention to me. They must think I have a great deal of influence over 
you. They gave very little attention to Raja." The next day, Rajaratnam, 
my foreign minister, received much more and Choo much less attention 
from our hosts. It was so obvious that I wondered if they wanted us to 
know they were eavesdropping. For the rest of the trip, even in the bath­
room, I felt that they were monitoring my thoughts. 
After 1970, we had no more high-level contacts except for four visits 
from Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister N. P. Firyubin to Singapore 
between 1974 and 1980. I chided him for not supporting Asean when 
even mainland China had voiced its support. They were suspicious of 
Asean as an anti-Soviet pro-U.S. organization. Firyubin was highly intel­
ligent and pleasant to talk to, but had no power to decide policy. When 
we met for the last time in April 1980, he tried to burnish the poor repu­
tation of the Soviets after their support for Vietnam's occupation of 
Cambodia and their own invasion of Afghanistan. He said the Soviet 
Union wanted detente with the rest of the world and referred to the 
recent visits of Vietnamese leaders to Southeast Asian capitals as an indi­
cation of their new mood for peace. Vietnam was willing to discuss the 
establishment of a zone of peace, freedom, and prosperity. The Soviet 
Union supported this and would do everything to maintain peace, secu­
rity, and mutual trust. I was blunt in contradicting his views. If they 
wanted peace, they should get Vietnam to reverse its aggression in 
Cambodia, which had alarmed all the other countries in Southeast Asia. I 
emphasized that the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan in December 
1979 had made all countries in Southeast Asia fearful of Soviet intentions. 
We also discovered around this time that our cypher officer in 
Moscow had been compromised by a Russian woman and had handed her 
the embassy's decoded messages. They must have done this routinely for 
all embassies, whether friend or foe. What they hoped to learn from read­
ing our communications with our embassy puzzled me, for all we wanted 
was to stay out of trouble with them. 
After Vietnam invaded Cambodia, Russian propaganda had turned 
hostile against Singapore, speaking of 25 million Chinese who lived out­
side the People's Republic of China as China's proxies, a dangerous Fifth 
Column in their countries of residence. I reminded Firyubin that the 
444 From Third World to First 
Soviet Union had an embassy in Singapore but China did not, that he 
knew I disapproved of the Chinese government's attempts to appeal to 
overseas Chinese in the region over the heads of Southeast Asian govern­
ments. However, Vietnam's aggression and occupation of Cambodia had 
succeeded in stifling fears the Thais and others had of China. The Soviet 
Union had to make a fundamental decision to change its policy. The less 
trouble it created in Southeast Asia, the fewer the opportunities for China 
to get closer to these countries. 
After the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, we joined the boycott of the 
1980 Moscow Olympics, froze the cultural exchange program and 
deferred all visits by their economic delegations. We also denied repair 
facilities and even bunkering to their naval and auxiliary vessels in our 
civilian dockyards, and overflight and technical stopover facilities for 
Soviet aircraft flying to Indonesia. 
Relations remained frozen for nearly a decade until Gorbachev intro­
duced glasnost and perestroika. When Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov 
visited Singapore in February 1990 he represented a different government 
and country. He had none of the self-confidence and swagger of a leader of 
a big power. He had approached Deputy Prime Minister Ong Teng 
Cheong for a $50 million loan to buy Singapore consumer goods. I did 
not agree and told Ong Teng Cheong not to respond. By the time the 
prime minister of the Soviet Union had to approach tiny Singapore for a 
$50 million loan, they must have exhausted their credit with all the big 
countries. A sovereign debt from the Soviet Union was worthless. 
He was taken to an NTUC-owned "Fairprice " supermarket. When I 
gave him dinner that night at the lstana, he expressed his amazement that 
our workers could afford the wide variety he saw of meats, fruits, and veg­
etables imported from all over the world. That the Soviet Union was suf­
fering from food shortages at the time brought this subject to the fore­
front of his thoughts. 
Ryzhkov was pleasantly soft-spoken and friendly. He admitted that 
Stalin's imposition of the command economy and the isolation of the 
Soviet Union under conditions of autarky had done damage. His govern­
ment had since made a turnaround. They had now seen how closely inter­
related the world had become and had decided to get intensively involved 
in international economic relations irrespective of the country's system. 
The Soviet Union : An Empire Implodes 445 
He invited me to visit the Soviet Union, which I did in September 
that year. This time, the welcoming ceremony at Moscow airport was very 
different. Their guard of honor was no longer of uniformly tall six-foot­
three guardsmen. They were a mixed lot of the tall, short, and medium, 
and the bandsmen were similarly an odd mix. The clockwork military 
precision was missing. They no longer bothered to create that sense of awe 
in their visitors. 
Ryzhkov was late for his meeting with me and apologized profusely. 
He had been held up in the Supreme Soviet trying to find a compromise 
between two divergent sets of proposals for a transition of the Soviet 
economy to an open-market system. He displayed a total loss of confi­
dence in their system and bewilderment at how to get into a market sys­
tem. He said his government had watched Singapore with great interest 
because they were now embarking on a transition to a market economy 
and were attracted by the remarkable changes in Singapore. They were 
also studying the experiences of many countries to extract the positive 
elements of how others had managed their economy. I thought how disas­
trous it was for a huge country like the Soviet Union to be talking of 
learning about the market economy from other countries at this late stage 
of disintegration. 
My meeting with President Mikhail Gorbachev was postponed sev­
eral times because he was caught up in a series of intense discussions on 
the next step into a market economy. Soviet protocol officers were apolo­
getic, but I told my ambassador not to worry. We were witnessing the end 
of an empire. I had the advantage of having seen an earlier one, the col­
lapse of the British Empire in February 1942 as the Japanese captured us. 
I was taken to his office at the Kremlin when he broke away from one of 
the interminable meetings to meet me for half an hour. All formalities 
were put aside as we met in a small group, he with only his chef de cabinet 
and one interpreter, and I with only my deputy prime minister, Goh 
Chok Tong, and my foreign minister, Wong Kan Seng. 
He was uncertain what his next steps should be to solve almost insol­
uble problems. I thought to myself that he had made a fatal mistake 
going for glasnost (openness) before perestroika (restructur ing), that 
Deng Xiaoping had been wiser doing it the other way around. Gorbachev 
looked composed, calm, and sincere when he said that each nation was 
446 From Third World to First 
unique and no country must dominate another militarily. He said the 
Soviet Union was engaged in perestroika, grappling with the question of 
choice, the choice of political and economic reform, and how it should 
proceed. The Soviet Union had begun its perestroika in 1917 but that had 
not worked out the way it was supposed to. Now he was trying all over 
again. He understood that Singapore's perestroika had started many years 
ago. He valued the development of bilateral relations. 
It was a miracle, I said, that the transformation of the Soviet Union 
was so peaceful. If he could get through the next three to five years with­
out violence, he would have scored a great triumph. I complimented him 
for not using military might to solve his problems since otherwise it 
would have been disastrous for the world. He replied that no matter what 
stage of economic or cultural development a country was in, no one could 
say which was first-rate and which was second-rate because each nation 
was unique in its own way. 
As we walked out of the Kremlin, I marveled that such a decent man 
could reach the top of so evil a system. A lesser leader would have sought 
to resolve the problems of the Soviet Union by using its huge military 
capabilities, which would have caused untold damage to the rest of the 
world. It was a stroke of good fortune for the United States and indeed the 
world. 
In my discussions with China's leaders, I discovered their totally dif­
ferent view of Gorbachev as a superpower leader who had listened to the 
siren calls of his enemies. He should have been on guard when his ene­
mies' media praised him. Instead, he followed their exhortations and by 
glasnost (openness) brought about the disintegration of his country, 
exactly what his foes wanted. Therefore, when the American media 
referred to Vice Premier Zhu Rongji as China's Gorbachev , Zhu quickly 
distanced himself from anything that might be seen to be like Gorbachev. 
The accolade he or any Chinese leader preferred was to be seen as a Deng 
Xiaoping with his socialist realism, that black cats or white cats both 
caught mice. Few Chinese, leaders or ordinary people, commiserated with 
Gorbachev when he was repudiated by his own people with less than 1 
percent voting for him in the 1996 Russian presidential election. They 
saw him as having dismantled the Soviet empire in a way the CIA would 
have been proud to have done. 
The Soviet Union: An Empire Implodes 447 
The Soviet Union's disintegration did not affect Singapore as we had 
few economic links with it. The first sign of its system breaking down 
was when the visits of its fishing fleet became irregular. Ships' captains 
were selling their fish elsewhere, sometimes on the high seas, to pay their 
crew and the dockyards that repaired their vessels cheaper than we could. 
Central control from Moscow had broken down. Aeroflot, the Soviet air­
line, was in similar difficulties. It did not have the hard currency to pay 
for aviation fuel and had to beg for petty cash from Moscow Narodny 
Bank's branch in Singapore to pay for fuel to fly back to Moscow. 
Despite this growing chaos Aeroflot brought in plane-loads of 
Russian tourists who shopped for electronic goods they could sell at sev­
eral times their cost once past Moscow customs. They were profitable 
excursions for these freelance traders. Soon more Russian women than 
men arrived. Word had got around that all they needed was their air 
ticket and taxi fare to our hotels where male clients would provide them 
with the resources to pay for the electronic goods to take home at the end 
of their short stay. Our ambassador in Moscow was a moral man who dis­
approved of this and approached the Soviet interior ministry to get them 
not to issue passports to such women. But the flow of these enterprising 
young Russian women amateurs continued. 
When I visited the Soviet Union that September of 1970 and met 
Premier Kosygin at his holiday dacha on the Black Sea, the Soviet leaders 
were expansive and assertive, confident that the future belonged to them. 
To watch this massive, tightly controlled empire shudder, become 
ungovernable, and then break up, was an awesome spectacle. Something 
like this must have happened to China in the last decades of the Qing 
dynasty. The difference is that Russia still has nuclear capability, an ulti­
mate deterrent against any predator out to dismember it. And anyone 
who believes that the Russians are finished as a powerful people should 
remember the nuclear and space scientists, chess grandmasters, and 
Olympic champions they nurtured despite a crippling centrally planned 
economy . Unlike their communist system, the Russians are not a people 
to be consigned to the dustbin of history. 
28. America: The Anticommun ist Anchorman 
In late August 1965, within days of the trauma of separation from 
Malaysia, I was suddenly faced with a personal problem . Choo had a wor­
rying medical condition that required surgery. Her gynecolo gist, Dr. 
Benjamin Sheares, recommended an American specialist who was the best 
doctor in this field. I tried to get him to come but could not persuade him 
to do so. He wanted Choo to go to Switzerland where he was going for 
some other engagement. I enlisted the help of the U.S. consul-general 
and, through him, the U.S. government. They were unhelpful; either they 
could not or would not help. I approached the British to get their top spe­
cialist named by Sheares. He agreed and immediately flew to Singapore, 
expressing understa nding for my not wanting her to travel abroad when I 
could not leave Singapore. This incident reinforced my gut feeling that I 
would find it difficult to work with the Americans whom I did not know 
as well as the British. 
I was angry and under stress. In a television interview with foreign 
correspondents a few days later, I fired a broadside at the Americans . I 
expressed my unhappiness that the U.S. government had not been able to 
help in persuading an American medical specialist to come to Singapore 
to treat someone dear to me. Then I disclosed publicly for the first time 
the story of how, four years earlier, a CIA agent had tried to bribe an offi­
cer of our Special Branch (our internal intelligence agency). 
In 1961, the CIA offered this officer a fantastic salary and guaranteed 
that if his activities were discovered or he got into trouble, they would 
450 From Third World to First 
remove him and his family to America and his future was assured. Their 
proposition was so attractive that the officer took three days to consider it 
before deciding he had to tell his chief, Richard Corridan, about it. 
Corridan immediately reported to me and I told him to lay a trap. He did 
and caught three Americans red-handed in an apartment on Orange Grove 
Road as they were about to administer a polygraph lie-detector test on 
our Special Branch officer to check his honesty. One was a member of the 
U.S. consulate here and claimed diplomatic immunity; two were CIA 
officers, one based in Bangkok, the other in Kuala Lumpur. They were 
caught with enough evidence to send them to jail for 12 years. The 
American consul-general , who knew nothing about it, resigned. 
After discussing the matter with Keng Swee, Chin Chye, Raja, and 
Pang Boon, I told the British commissioner, Lord Selkirk, that we would 
release these men and their stupidity would not be made public if the 
Americans gave a hundred million U.S. dollars to the Singapore govern­
ment for economic development. They offered US$ l million, not to the 
Singapore government , but to the PAP-an unbelievable insult. The 
Americans had been buying and selling so many leaders in Vietnam and 
elsewhere that they believed they could buy and sell leaders everywhere. 
We had to release one American who had diplomatic immunity but we 
held the two CIA officers on detention orders for one year under Emer­
gency Regulations. At Selkirk's repeated urgings, we released them a 
month later with a warning never to do this again. We hoped the warning 
would be heeded, but feared it would not. 
In response to this public disclosure, the U.S. State Department 
denied that any bribe had been offered, and deplored my statement as 
"unfortunate, unhelpful and simply playing into the hands of the Indo­
nesians." "The Americans stupidly denied the undeniable, " I replied, 
releasing details and a letter dated 15 April 1961 signed by Dean Rusk: 
Dear Prime Minister: 
I am deeply distressed to learn that certain officials of the 
United States government have been found by your government 
to have been engaged in improper activities in Singapore. I want 
you to know that I regret very much that this unfortunate inci­
dent has occurred to mar the friendly relations that exist between 
America: The Ant icommunist Anch orman 
our governments. The new administration takes a very serious 
view of this matter and intends to review the activities of these 
officials for disciplinary action. 
Sincerely yours, 
(Sgd Dean Rusk) 451 
My attitude in 1961 to America and Americans was summed up in 
my instructions to Corridan: "Investigate this matter thorough ly, every 
aspect of it. Leave nothing unturned until you get to the heart of the mat­
ter. But remember all the time that we are not dealing with an enemy, but 
the bloody stupidity of a friend." 
Besides venting my anger on the Americans for being unhelpful, my 
objective in exposing this incident that August 1965 was to signal to the 
West that if the British pulled out, there would be no American bases in 
Singapore, but we would "go along with Australia and New Zealand." I 
wanted the British to remain. I was fearful that after our sudden separa­
tion from Malaysia, Britain would want to withdraw as soon as 
Indonesian Confrontation ended. 
I viewed Americans with mixed feelings. I admired their can-do 
approach but shared the view of the British establishment of the time that 
the Americans were bright and brash, that they had enormous wealth but 
often misused it. It was not true that all it needed to fix a problem was to 
bring resources to bear on it. Many American leaders believed that racial, 
religious, and linguistic hatreds, rivalries, hostilities, and feuds down the 
millennia could be solved if sufficient resources were expended on them. 
(Some still do. Hence their efforts to build peaceful, multiracial, multire­
ligious societies in Bosnia and Kosovo.) 
Their methods of countering communism in Asia did not impress 
me. They were unprincipled in their dealing with Ngo Dinh Diem, South 
Vietnam's nationalist leader, backing him until he refused to do America's 
bidding, then looking the other way when Diem's generals assassinated 
him. They meant well but were heavy-handed and lacked a sense of his­
tory. I also feared they would consider all ethnic Chinese likely commu­
nist supporters because China was communist. 
But America was the only country with the strength and determina­
tion to stem this relentless tide of history and reverse the erosion of peo-
452 From Third World to First 
pie's will to resist the communists. So I wanted the British, Australians, 
and New Zealanders to be a buffer. Life would be difficult if Singapore 
were to become like Saigon or Manila. By themselves, the British in 
Malaysia and Singapore could not have blocked the communist advance 
into Southeast Asia. It was the Americans who stopped the Chinese and 
Vietnamese communists from spreading guerrilla insurgency into 
Cambodia and Thailand. The United States supported President Sukarno 
in Indonesia until the communists attempted a coup in September 1965. 
It was an irreplaceable backstop against further communist expansion. 
I was relieved the Americans were prepared to oppose communists 
wherever they threatened and whatever the cost. Because Americans were 
resolutely anticommunist and prepared to confront them, Nehru, Nasser, 
and Sukarno could afford to be nonaligned. This was a comfortable posture 
and one I had adopted without at first realizing that it was a luxury paid 
for by Americans. Without them out front, together with the British, 
Europeans, Australians , and New Zealanders, checking the Russian and 
Chinese communists, Singapore could not have been critical of China or 
Russia. 
I had made clear my support of American intervention in Vietnam. In 
May 1965, while Singapore was still in Malaysia, I spoke to a left-wing 
audience at an Asian Socialist Leaders' Conference in Bombay. At a time 
when Indians were neutral and critical of American action in Vietnam, I 
told them that "As Asians we must uphold the right of the Vietnamese 
people to self-determination and to be free from any hint of European 
domination. As democratic socialists we must insist that the South 
Vietnamese have the right not to be pressured through armed might and 
organised terror and finally overwhelmed by communism. So we must 
seek a formula that will first make it possible for the South Vietnamese to 
recover their freedom of choice, which at the moment is limited to either 
communist capture or perpetual American military operation s." 
In many speeches I had emphasized that the governments of 
Southeast Asia must use the time the Americans were buying for us by 
their intervention in Vietnam to solve the problems of poverty, unem­
ployment, and inequity in our societies. Unknown to me, the U.S. assis­
tant secretary for East Asia, William Bundy, had read my speeches. We 
met for the first time in my office in March 1966. He assured me that the 
America: The Anticommunist Anch orman 453 
United States intended to play a quiet role and did not wish to maintain a 
military presence in Malaysia. They had been drawn into Vietnam deeper 
than intended and were not anxious to get involved elsewhere in East 
Asia. 
The Americans wanted the British to stay in Malaysia for historical 
reasons, and because of a "division of labor." They would leave the major 
running of policy to the British, who were the only European power able 
to do it. If Malaysia turned to them for economic help, they would be 
happy to help but would take a low posture. 
I asked about U.S. reactions to a hypothetical communist-inspired 
communal conflict between Singapore and Malaysia. Bundy insisted that 
they would not like to get involved. I stressed that they should not view 
the entire Chinese diaspora as some monolithic group steered by the 
communists on the mainland. If American policy treated all Chinese in 
Southeast Asia as potential mainland Chinese agents, they would have no 
alternative but to become Chinese chauvinists. Asked about Vietnam, I 
said the will to resist was the critical factor. This was absent. The people 
of South Vietnam must be persuaded that there was a reasonable prospect 
that they could win the fight. 
Early in 1966 we agreed that American troops serving in Vietnam 
could come to Singapore for their rest and recreation. The first batch of 
100 arrived in March 1966 and stayed for five days in a rental apartment 
block in a suburban area. They flew in from Saigon three times a week in 
civilian chartered Pan American flights. About 20,000 came in a year, 7 
percent of the total number of tourists of that time. The financial benefits 
were small. It was a quiet way of showing support for America's effort in 
Vietnam. 
Bundy saw me again in March 1967. I felt I could trust him; he was 
open and straight-talking. He was not out to impress anyone and was care­
less about his clothes-I noticed that he wore torn socks. But he had an air 
of quiet confidence. He knew I had been pressing the British to stay. That 
was also American policy. He assured me that the United States would 
continue to slog it out in Vietnam, that the results were heartening : 
20,000 Vietcong had defected. He was confident that the Republicans, 
then out of government, had no alternative. The problems might become 
messy but President Johnson was very determined and would not give up 
454 From Third World to First 
because the United States was convinced their action in Vietnam was a 
major contribution to stability in Southeast Asia. 
Bundy invited me for an informal visit to Washington in the late 
autumn, away from the crush of visitors around the annual opening of the 
UN session. I would have a chance to meet and talk with the people who 
made their policies, and those in the wider circle who were part of their 
establishment. I said that while the British were running down their 
bases in Singapore, my visit to America would look like I was scared. 
In July 1967, he wrote to me and referred to reports from London 
that I might have made "a real dent amongst the Labour Party MPs who 
did not have an adequate understanding of the facts of life in Southeast 
Asia." He also welcomed my brief but forthright reference in a BBC tele­
vision interview to the critical importance of what the Americans were 
doing in Vietnam. America was getting such bad press that they were 
relieved when someone other than a client state stood up to voice sup­
port for their unpopular policy. He proposed an official visit. Raja was 
unhappy at having to announce so soon after the British defense white 
paper had been published that I would visit Washington. It would show 
that we were nervous. I decided to go. Bill Bundy must have had a reason 
for wanting me to go to Washington that year. 
I had not been to America except in 1962, to appear before the UN decol­
onization committee in New York. Singapore did not have a mission in 
Washington until that year, 1967. So I case around for a crash course on the 
thinking and mood in Washington and the major personalities. I drew on the 
British, Australian, and New Zealand high commissioners. I wrote to Louis 
Heren, a good friend since the 1950s who was then the London Times corre­
spondent in Washington. Of all the briefings, his was the most valuable. He 
wrote, "For a superpower such as the United States, all countries except the 
Soviet Union and China are small. You will not mind my saying that in com­
parison Singapore is a riddler. Outside the State Department's bureau for East 
Asian and Pacific affairs, very little attention is paid to it." He was reassuring , 
however, that I had a "reputation for being a sane, rational and steady sort of 
bloke," mainly because of my position on Vietnam. The fuss over the CIA 
incident had been largely forgotten. "The problem in America was three­
dimensional : the administration, Congress, and the press. The latter two tend 
to react in simple East-West terms. Are you a Commie or are you with the 
America: The Anticomm unist Anchorman 455 
U.S.? The administration is very different. Heaven knows there are enough 
simpletons in it, but there are also first-rate men. The obvious ones below cab­
inet level are William Bundy and Robert Barnett, one of Bundy's deputies, an 
acknowledged China expert, Walt Rostow, the president's special assistant for 
national security affairs." Other people I should look out for were Averell 
Harriman, ambassador at large, and Mike Mansfield, the majority leader in 
the senate, "well-informed and quietly influentia l." 
He gave a thumbnail sketch of Johnson, the best I read before seeing 
the president. "A strange man, devious, manipulating, and occasionally 
ruthless. Having said that, I must admit to being one of his few if quali­
fied admirers. He has fire in his belly, in the old Biblical sense. He wants 
to do well by his country, especially the poor and the Negroes .... Rusk 
and McNamara you can trust. Both are honest and rather nice men, good 
in the old-fashioned sense of the word." 
In October 1967, I flew to Kennedy Airport, New York, and then on to 
Williamsburg, where I stayed in one of those restored homes with antique 
furniture of the time when Williamsburg was the capital of Virginia. 
Choo and I were taken on a sightseeing tour of Williamsburg in a horse 
carriage with a black coachman dressed in period costume. It was histori­
cal Disneyland. The following day, we flew by helicopter to the White 
House. The protocol officer had asked me to shake President Johnson's 
left hand because his right hand was bandaged. When I landed on the 
White House lawn for a full state welcome with guard of honor, I shook 
Johnson's left hand like a good boy scout. 
Johnson used superlatives, describing me as "a patriot, a brilliant 
political leader, and a statesman of the new Asia," and Singapore as "a 
bright example of what can be accomplished, not only in Asia but in 
Africa and Latin America-wherever men work for a life of freedom and 
dignity." I was embarrassed by the extravagant praise, most un-British. In 
response, I obliquely endorsed what he was doing in Vietnam but asked 
whether Americans believed that their progeny would inherit the brave 
new world if they did not persevere (in Vietnam). 
Immediately after the welcoming ceremony, Johnson had a one-on­
one session with me. He was a tall, huge Texan with a booming voice. I 
456 From Third World to First 
felt dwarfed standing by his side. He was moody and troubled, but 
wanted to hear my views. He was relieved to find someone from Southeast 
Asia and near Vietnam who understood, sympathized, and quietly sup­
ported what he was doing to contain the communists and prevent them 
from capturing South Vietnam and causing more mischief beyond Vietnam. 
Johnson was very direct. Was the war winnable ? Was he doing right? 
I told him he was doing right but the war was not winnable in a military 
sense. He could prevent the communists from winning. This would allow 
a Vietnamese leadership to emerge around which the people would rally. 
That would be a victory because that government would have the support 
of the people and it would be noncommunist. I had no doubts that in a 
free vote the people would vote against the communists. He was cheered, 
if momentarily . 
At dinner in the White House that night, Johnson replied to my 
question on American staying power, "Yes, America has the resolution 
and the restraint to see this struggle through in Vietnam .... I cannot put 
it more clearly or with more confidence. You have a phrase in your part of 
the world that puts our determination well. You call it 'riding the tiger.' 
You rode the tiger. We shall." 
After dinner, a few senators took me out to the upstairs porch over­
looking the White House lawn. A tall, pale, lean Mike Mansfield, a 
Democrat from Montana and senate majority leader, asked me a direct 
question: Did I think the assassination of Diem did good or harm? It did 
harm, I said. There was no one to replace him who was more able to lead. 
There could have been other ways to get Diem to change his policy or his 
method of ruling. Bumping him off had produced instability , and worse, 
uncertainty as to whether any leader who stood up for Vietnam and 
refused to follow American advice could survive. He pursed his lips and 
said, yes, it was bad. He asked what the solutions were. I told him there 
were no easy ones, no quick shoot-outs at high noon. It was going to be a 
long, hard slog, unglamorous. Just to tough it out and prevent the com­
munists from winning while a South Vietnamese leadership emerged­
that would be victory enough. It meant a long stay. I could see from his 
face that Americans would find that difficult. 
Dean Rusk, the secretary of state, was a quiet, thoughtful man, look­
ing more an academic than a politician. I told him I hoped the next 
America: The Anticommunist Anchorman 457 
American president would win his election in a way that would convince 
Hanoi that the American people had the patience and resolve to see the 
war through. If America disengaged, the tide would go against all non­
communist countries. Thailand would change sides and Malaysia would 
be put through the mincing machine of guerrilla insurgency. After that, 
with fraternal communist parties in control, the communists would cut 
our throats in Singapore. The Chinese army would not have to march into 
Southeast Asia. 
Vice President Hubert Humphrey spoke with little reservation. He 
was convinced that apart from a minority who were either hawks or doves, 
70 to 80 percent of the senate supported the president's Vietnam policy. 
The opposition was from a generation of Americans who had grown up 22 
years after the Second World War. They had not known war or real eco­
nomic hardship. They were the hard core of opposition in the universities. 
It was important that people like me, who were nonaligned and known to 
be politically independent, should speak up and stop the erosion of public 
opinion in the United States. His fear was that unless people like me 
could help keep the carpet under Johnson's feet, he would be beaten in 
America, not Vietnam. Humphrey was a likeable man and politically 
shrewd, but I doubted his toughness. 
Robert McNamara, the defense secretary, was bright-eyed , eager, and 
full of energy. He thought American and Singapore objectives were exactly 
the same; we both wanted the British to stay in Singapore. The American 
people did not want to see the United States standing alone. He said 
Britain's purchase of F-11 ls showed its very strong ties with the United 
States and its intention to fullfil British commitments in Southeast Asia. 
This was October 1967, one month before Britain devalued the pound and 
decided to abandon east of Suez. 
With both the House foreign affairs committee and the senate foreign 
relations committee, the main topic was Vietnam. I gave them answers 
that brought little relief to their concerns. They wanted to hear answers 
that could be executed within a year or less, before the next presidential 
election. I offered no such solutions. 
At Harvard, I spoke to some students and also met Professor Richard 
Neustadt, director of the Institute of Politics in Harvard and a specialist on 
the American presidency . I had asked Bill Bundy if it was possible for me 
458 From Third World to First 
co spend a short sabbatical to get to know Americans and their system. I 
felt I had to understand them. They had different strengths and weaknesses 
from the British. Theirs was a vast continent. They had no single tightly 
knit group of decisionmakers all clustered around either Washington or 
New York as the British had in London. American decisionmakers were 
scattered over 50 states, each with differing interests and different pulls. 
Bundy arranged for me to meet Neustadt, who promised to tailor a course 
for me at the Institute of Politics for one term in the fall of 1968. 
I was on the go every day, talking endlessly to the media and to differ­
ent groups-the Asia Society, the Council of Foreign Relations in New 
York, students in Harvard and in St. Louis, the Foreign Relations Council 
in Chicago, and the press and television in Los Angeles. Even in 
Honolulu, where I stayed as the house guest of the commander in chief, 
Pacific, I had co talk. Only at the resort of Mauna Kea on the big island of 
Hawaii could I relax, play golf the whole day, and watch the manta ray at 
night after dinner. 
Reports from our missions in Washington, Canberra, and Wellington 
were good, but Keng Swee and Raja were disturbed that I sounded coo 
pro-American, defending Johnson's intervention in Vietnam. This might 
alienate our grassroots Chinese-speaking base. They advised me co move 
back to a more neutral position. When I returned to Singapore, I dis­
cussed this with them and changed my language to a more critical stance, 
but still gave clear support to the American presence in Vietnam. I was 
convinced that co knock U.S. policy in Vietnam would hurt President 
Johnson and cause damage to his position in America. I was not prepared 
co do what was against Singapore's interest. 
My 10-day visit left me with some strong impressions. As I told my 
cabinet colleagues, our relationship with the United States was superfi­
cial, unlike our relationship with Britain. The Americans thought in 
terms of numbers and size. In Southeast Asia, Malaysians and Singa­
poreans were nothing compared to the Indonesians. 
Events moved unexpectedly and decisively after my return. The 
British devalued the pound and in January 1968 announced early with­
drawal-by 1971. Two weeks later, the North Vietnamese launched their 
Tet (New Year) offensive. They surged into more than a hundred cities 
America: The Antico mmunist Anch orman 459 
and towns, including Saigon. The American public was shaken by televi­
sion reports of this offensive. In fact, the Vietnamese offensive was a fail­
ure, but the media convinced Americans that it was an unmitigated disas­
ter for them and that the war was lost. Two months later, on 31 March, 
Johnson announced, "I shall not seek and I will not accept the nomination 
of my party as president." From then on it was a despondent America 
hanging on grimly, waiting for a new president to seek a not dishonorable 
withdrawal from Vietnam. 
From October to December 1968, as planned, I took a short sabbati­
cal in the University of British Columbia (UBC) and Harvard and left 
Goh Keng Swee in charge. I spent several weeks at UBC. From their fac­
ulty club, where I was a guest, I watched the U.S. presidential election 
campaign on television. After Nixon won, I flew from Vancouver to 
Ottawa to meet Pierre Trudeau, who had become prime minister earlier 
that year. Then on to Boston and Harvard where I was a visiting fellow at 
the Institute of Politics, which was attached to the John F. Kennedy 
School of Government. 
At Harvard's Eliot House, where I stayed with some 200 students and 
10 fellows, I had an immersion course on American culture. Neustadt had 
arranged for me a wide exposure to American scholars in various fields, 
mainly American government and politics, development economics, 
motivation, and productivity. It was a full program of morning discus­
sions with one group, a working lunch with another, an afternoon semi­
nar, and social dinners at night with distinguished scholars. At the annual 
Harvard versus Yale football game, I had a taste of American youthful 
exuberance complete with porn-porn-waving cheerleaders. The efficiency 
of the arrangements was impressive. A graduate student attached to me 
chased up materials or arranged any meetings I wanted in addition to 
what had been fixed. The Secret Service caused quite a disruption to the 
normal life of Eliot House, parking their center of operations in the senior 
common room to give me 24-hour security. I dined in the hall with the 
students, fellows, and the master, Alan Heimert. I was struck by the easy 
informality between teachers and students. The students were extremely 
bright; one teacher confessed that it could be quite unnerving to argue 
with some of them. 
460 From Third World to First 
The academics in Cambridge, Massachusetts, were different from 
those in Cambridge, England. British dons of the 1940s to 1960s were 
happy to be in their ivory tower, separated from the hurly-burly of 
London and Westminster. American professors, on the other hand, in­
creased their stature by being associated with the government. In the 
Kennedy administration many of the professors would take the Boston­
New York-Washington shuttle. The forte of British academics of that 
period was in rigorous study of the past, not of the present or the future, 
which involved conjecture. They did not have the direct interaction with 
business and industry that the Harvard Business School provided. The 
Americans, unlike the British, did not confine themselves to a critical 
examination of the past. Investigating the present to predict the future is 
a strength of American scholarship. Their think tanks have made futurol­
ogy a respectable subject under the title "futuristic studies." 
My greatest benefit was not more knowledge but the contacts and 
friendships I made with scholars who were not only expert on contem­
porary affairs but also had access to the nerve centers of American gov­
ernment and business. I was a curiosity in Harvard, an Asian politician 
taking time off to recharge his batteries and seek knowledge in academia 
at the age of 45, after 10 years in office. They readily hosted dinners for 
me to meet interesting people including economist John Kenneth 
Galbraith, Japan specialist and former U.S. ambassador to Japan Edwin 
Reischauer, China specialist John Fairbank, MIT political science teacher 
Lucien Pye, who had done research on guerrilla communism in Malaya 
in the 1950s, and MIT's Paul Samuelson, famous for his economics text­
book, who explained to me why Americans still kept low-value-added 
industries like textiles. My most valuable discussions were with Ray 
Vernon of the Harvard Business School. He gave me such practical in­
sights into the workings of the contemporary economies of Hong Kong 
and Taiwan (described earlier) that I returned every four years to learn 
more from him. 
I found many other fresh ideas and picked the brains of other highly 
intelligent people who were not always right. They were too politically 
correct. Harvard was determinedly liberal. No scholar was prepared to say 
or admit that there were any inherent differences between races or cul-
America: The Antic ommunist Anch orman 461 
tures or religions. They held that human beings were equal and a society 
only needed correct economic policies and institutions of government to 
succeed. They were so bright I found it difficult to believe that they sin­
cerely held these views they felt compelled to espouse. 
Harvard faculty members I met across a dinner table were sharp, witty, 
and stimulating , even though I did not always agree with them. Galbraith 
had the most acerbic tongue of all. At one dinner, I met Henry Kissinger. 
It was pure serendipity that at that dinner where many liberal Americans 
voiced strong criticisms of the Vietnam War, I took the contrary view and 
explained that America's stand was crucial for the future of a noncommu­
nist Southeast Asia. Kissinger was circumspect in his choice of words to 
justify American intervention. Surrounded by doves, he was careful not to 
appear a hawk. Speaking slowly in his heavy German-accented English, he 
gave me the impression of a man who was not going to be swept along by 
the mood of the moment. Shortly afterward, Nixon's office announced that 
Kissinger would be the national security adviser. By then he had left 
Harvard. Before I flew home that December, I met him in New York to 
encourage him to stay the course in Vietnam, and said that preventing the 
communists from winning was within America's capability. 
I wanted to call on President Johnson. Bill Bundy was surprised that I 
wanted to see a lame duck president and not the president-elect. I said 
Nixon needed time to sort out his staff and agenda and I could come back 
after he had settled into his job. It was a forlorn and melancholy Johnson I 
met. He said he had put everything he had into Vietnam. His two sons­
in-law were in the armed forces and both had served in Vietnam. No man 
could do more. I left a disconsolate Lyndon Johnson. 
My next visit to America was in 1969. I called on President Nixon on 12 
May. He had met me in Singapore in April 1967 when on a tour of 
Southeast Asia to prepare himself for the presidential election the follow­
ing year. He was a serious thinker, knowledgeable about Asia and the 
world. He always wanted the big picture. For over an hour in my office, I 
answered his questions. The Cultural Revolution was then at its height. 
He asked me what I thought was going on. I said that the only direct 
462 From Third World to First 
knowledge we had was from debriefing our older folk whom we allowed 
to visit their relatives in Guangdong and Fujian provinces in southeast 
coastal China. As far as we could make out, Mao wanted to remake China. 
Like the first Chinese emperor, Qin Shihuang, who had burnt all the 
books of the time to wipe out what had gone before, Mao wanted to erase 
the old China and paint a new one. But Mao was painting on an old 
Chinese picture imbedded in mosaic; the rains would come, Mao's paint 
would be washed off, and the mosaic would reappear. Mao had only one 
lifetime and did not have the time or power to erase over 4,000 years of 
Chinese history, tradition, culture, and literature. Even if all the books 
were burnt, the proverbs and sayings would survive in the folk memory of 
the people. Mao was doomed to fail. (Years later, in his retirement, Nixon 
quoted what I had said in a book. He also quoted me on the Japanese, that 
they had the drive and the ability to be more than just makers and sellers 
of transistor radios. Only then did I learn that, like me, Nixon had the 
habit of making notes after a serious discussion.) 
Asked about U.S.-China enmity, I said there was no natural or abid­
ing source of enmity between China and the United States. China's nat­
ural enemy was the Soviet Union with whom it shared a 4,000-mile 
boundary which had been shifted to China's disadvantage only in the last 
100 years. There were old scores to settle. The boundary between America 
and China was an artificial one drawn on water across the Straits of 
Taiwan. It was ephemeral and would pass with time. 
When we met in Washington in 1969, Nixon again questioned me 
on China. I gave him basically the same replies. I did not know then that 
his mind was already focused on China to improve America's position vis­
a-vis the Soviet Union. 
The subject that took the most time was Vietnam. America, he said, 
was a large, rich, powerful nation engaged in a guerrilla war with Viet­
nam, a poor country, underdeveloped and with practically no technology. 
Billions of American dollars had been spent on the war which had cost 
32,600 American dead and 200,000 casualties . This had nearly exhausted 
the patience of the American people and members of Congress. Pressures 
were mounting daily for an American pullout as soon as possible. But he 
had to consider the effects of the pullout on the South Vietnamese people, 
America: The Anticommunist Anchorman 463 
government, and military, on Vietnam's neighbors in Southeast Asia, on 
America's allies, including Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, South 
Korea, and Thailand, and on the world in general. The issue was the cred­
ibility of American promises. Despite pressure from American public 
opinion in Congress, he had to ensure the best solution to the problem. I 
sensed that he wanted to end the Vietnam War because of domestic oppo­
sition, but was not about to be the first American president to lose a war. 
He wanted an honorable exit. 
I expressed my amazement at the Americans' loss of confidence. A 
precipitate ending of the Vietnam War would have dangerous and unpre­
dictable consequences not just in Vietnam but also in neighboring coun­
tries, especially Thailand, which had totally committed itself in support 
of the United States. Any withdrawal should be purposeful and gradual so 
that South Vietnamese soldiers could take on more of the war-they must 
be pushed to take on their share of the fighting. The solution was to get a 
group of dedicated South Vietnamese leaders to tackle their problems 
with the dedication and sense of purpose the Vietcong displayed . The aim 
should be for South Vietnam to be like South Korea, where some 30,000 
to 50,000 American soldiers were stationed to enable the South Korean 
armed forces to increase their capability year by year. For such a with­
drawal to succeed, Hanoi and the Vietcong had to get the message that 
America had all the time in the world for a slow, deliberate withdrawal 
and the president would not be pressured into a hasty and calamitous 
pullout. Hanoi was fighting the war in Washington and was helped 
unwittingly by many in Congress, egged on by the media. The U.S. role 
should be to help the South Vietnamese fight for themselves, so that if 
they fought and lost the United States could not be held responsible, pro­
vided they had been given enough time and equipment; in other words, 
to Vietnamize the war. He showed interest. The scheduled half-hour 
meeting went on for one and a quarter hours. He wanted reasons to 
believe that he could get out in a way that would not mean a defeat. I 
believed it was possible. That cheered him. 
When I next met Nixon on 5 November 1970, he appeared fatigued 
after a strenuous midterm election campaign . He went over the Vietnam 
options. Then he turned to China. I suggested that he open America's 
464 From Third World to First 
doors and windows to China and begin trade on nonstrategic goods. 
When two-thirds of the UN members supported China's admission, the 
United States should not be seen to be blocking it. America should not be 
discouraged by Mao's negative attitude. I repeated, the United States had 
no common frontier with China as the Russians had. 
At a separate meeting in the White House annex, Henry Kissin­
ger asked me about the proposed Russian use of the dockyard at the 
naval base in Singapore. As I expected, he had heard from Ted Heath of 
Kosygin's interest in the use of the naval base after the British left. I had 
earlier told Heath this to encourage him not to leave the naval base in a 
hurry. I assured Kissinger that I would not make a decision without first 
informing the British and him. The Russian move had given me a card to 
play. I hoped the Americans would encourage the Australians to remain 
in Singapore. I was comfortable with Britain, Australia, New Zealand, 
and Malaysia in the Five-Power Defence Arrangeme nt. I orbited around 
Australia and New Zealand and they orbited around the United States-a 
happy situation for Singapore. "And for the U.S.," Kissinger added. I said 
that because Singapore did not receive U.S. aid, I could speak as an objec­
tive, nonaligned voice from Southeast Asia. Kissinger agreed that this was 
best for both of us. 
Meanwhile, Kissinger had contacted the leaders in Beijing through 
the Pakistanis . He secretly visited Beijing in 1971 to prepare for Nixon's 
visit in February 1972. When Nixon announced it in January 1972, it 
astonished the world. I was uneasy that he should have done this without 
first telling any of his Asian allies, neither the Japanese nor the govern­
ment of the Republic of China, their other ally in Taiwan. That visit was 
indeed "a week that changed the world," as Nixon said. 
The war situation in Vietnam appeared unpromising when I next visited 
America, in April 1973. Casualties continued with no victory in sight, and 
the U.S. Congress was pressing the administration to disengage totally 
from Southeast Asia. Choo and I had lunch with Robert McNamara, then 
World Bank president, and his wife at their home in Georgetown. Looking 
grave, McNamara said there were disturbing reports that Nixon was 
involved in the coverup of Watergate and things might get very difficult. 
America: The Anticommunist Anchorman 465 
I had a premonition of trouble ahead, both for Nixon and for Southeast 
Asia. 
When I arrived at the White House on the morning of 10 April, the 
president was at the front porch to greet me. He was warm and friendly 
and went out of his way to show his appreciation for my consistent public 
backing of his lonely position on Vietnam and Cambodia . For photo 
opportunities, he strolled with me in the White House rose garden and 
talked of the roses and the crabapple trees in full bloom. Inside the White 
House, Nixon said he did not see China as an immediate threat; it would 
be a force to reckon with only in 10 or 15 years when its nuclear program 
had matured. He asked about Vietnam and the ceasefire terms under 
which the United States had promised aid to reconstruct North Vietnam. 
I replied that it was the best possible arrangement under the circumstances . 
It was right to woo the North Vietnamese away from dependence on 
Russia and China. If America did not give any aid for reconstruction, the 
North Vietnamese would become more dependent on Russia and China. 
In spite of his many preoccupations so soon after his reelection as pres­
ident and with Watergate brewing, Nixon gave a White House dinner in 
my honor. There is a ritual at White House dinners which makes for pres­
idential grandeur. Choo and I walked down the staircase of the White 
House with the president and his wife accompanied by several ADCs 
resplendent in bemedalled uniforms and gold aiguillett es. We paused at 
the landing as a fanfare of trumpets drew everyone's attention. A hush fell 
as we walked down the final flight of stairs with the assembled guests look­
ing up at us. Then we lined up--the president, Mrs. Nixon, myself, and 
Choo--to receive the guests. It was the same ritual as when Lyndon 
Johnson gave me dinner in 1967. But Nixon's style was different. He 
shook every hand with enthusiasm and the appropriate greeting: "Glad to 
see you again." "How nice to see you." "How good of you." In between he 
would insert a few words of praise or comment on particular guests as I 
shook hands with them. In the midst of all this, he said in an aside, "Never 
use the wrong expression, like 'How do you do.' You may have met the 
man before. It will show you did not recognize him and he will be 
offended. Always use a neutral phrase like 'How nice to see you.' 'How 
good to see you.' 'It is good to see you.' And if you recognize him, 'Ah, it 
is a long time since we last met. How good to see you again.'" He was a 
466 From Third World to First 
professional but had little small talk and never told jokes, unlike Ronald 
Reagan whose conversation was rich with such social lubricants. 
Marshall Green, assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific 
affairs, asked for my views on America's China initiatives, meaning 
Nixon's visit to China in February 1972. I said they could not be faulted 
except for the element of surprise. If it had been done with less surprise, 
the favorable results would have been even better. The surprise factor had 
planted apprehension in Japanese and Southeast Asian minds that big 
powers were prone to sudden policy switches which could leave them on 
the wrong side. 
Green explained that the Japanese had great difficulty in keeping 
secrets; they said so themselves. He stressed that the new relationshi p 
with China had not changed America's policy toward any other nation in 
the area. Taiwan had been concerned at the outset. But it was now clear 
that the United States was maintaining its treaty commitments. Korea 
had also been worried but now realized that their relationship with the 
United States had not been altered at all. In short, normalization of rela­
tions with the People's Republic of China had been taken at no one's 
expense. The end result was more stability for all in Asia. 
Increased contact with Western civilization and technology, I said, 
was bound to have an effect on China. Its present isolation could not be 
sustained. For example, because of the total insulation of the Chinese peo­
ple from the outside world, their ping-pong team that visited Singapore 
was unwilling to talk of anything but ping-pong. I believed once the 
Chinese economy was past the "line of barest necessities, " they would face 
the problems the Soviets now had. The Chinese people would want 
choices in the products available to them, and with choices they would 
lose their egalitarian fervor. 
Green assured me that the United States fully intended to continue 
to play an important stabilizing role in Asia. "We will keep our forces in 
the area and we will meet our treaty commitments ." I was reminded of 
Harold Wilson and Denis Healey's earlier assurances that Britain would 
stay in Singapore. I consoled myself with the thought that because 
America, unlike Britain, had never depended on a colonial empire to be a 
world power, it would not be under the same economic pressure to with­
draw from Asia. 
America: The Anticommunist Anchorman 467 
When Nixon resigned on 9 August 1974, to avoid impeachment 
for Watergate, I feared for South Vietnam. As one of his last acts as presi­
dent, Nixon had signed into law a bill that imposed a ceiling ofUS$1 bil­
lion on American military aid to South Vietnam for the next 11 months. 
Within days of his resignation, the House of Representatives voted to 
trim it to US$700 million. The axe was falling and the neck on the chop­
ping block was President Thieu's. 
On 25 April 1975, Thieu left Saigon. On 30 April, as North 
Vietnamese troops were advancing into the city, an American helicopter 
took off from the embassy roof, a moment captured in that indelible 
photograph of panic-stricken South Vietnamese hanging on to the heli­
copter skids. Later that day, North Vietnamese tanks drove up to the pres­
idential palace and ceremonially knocked its gates down. 
Although American intervention failed in Vietnam, it bought time 
for the rest of Southeast Asia. In 1965, when the U.S. military moved 
massively into South Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, and the Philippines 
faced internal threats from armed communist insurgencies and the com­
munist underground was still active in Singapore. Indonesia, in the throes 
of a failed communist coup, was waging konfrontasi, an undeclared war 
against Malaysia and Singapore. The Philippines was claiming Sabah in 
East Malaysia. Standards of living were low and economic growth slow. 
America' s action enabled noncommunist Southeast Asia to put their own 
houses in order. By 1975, they were in better shape to stand up to the 
communists. Had there been no U.S. intervention, the will of these coun­
tries to resist them would have melted and Southeast Asia would most 
likely have gone commun ist. The prosperous emerging market economies 
of Asean were nurtured during the Vietnam War years. 
In the weeks before Saigon fell, a huge armada of small boats and 
ships packed with refugees set out across the South China Sea, many 
headed for Singapore. Quite a few of them were armed. Keng Swee, acting 
as prime minister, sent an urgent report to me in Washington that the 
number of refugees had reached several thousands in nearly a hundred 
boats. He wanted an immedia te policy decision. I signalled that we 
should refuse them landing and get them to move on to countries with 
more space to receive them. A massive exercise started on 6 May. The 
Singapore Armed Forces repaired, refitted, refuelled , reprovisioned, and 
468 From Third World to First 
sent out to sea a total of 64 vessels carrying more than 8,000 refugees. 
Many of the captains of these vessels had deliberately disabled their 
engines to avoid being sent off. 
As this operation was taking place, I called on President Gerald Ford 
at noon on 8 May 1975, eight days after the fall of Saigon. Kissinger, as 
secretary of state, was with him. Ford looked troubled but not despon­
dent. He asked for the region's reaction to the fall of Vietnam. I had been 
in Bangkok in April, just before Saigon fell. The Thais were nervous, as 
were people in Indonesia. Suharto was quietly and firmly in control. I said 
congressional intervention to stop the bombing of the communists had 
contributed to the fall of South Vietnam. If Watergate had not happened 
and the bombing had continued , the South Vietnamese forces would not 
have lost heart and the outcome could have been different. Once the 
bombings stopped and aid was significantly reduced, the fate of the South 
Vietnamese government was sealed. 
Ford asked where America should go from there. I said it was best to 
let the dust settle and watch how events unfolded in Laos, Cambodia, and 
Vietnam. I believed the Pathet Lao would take over Laos and come under 
Vietnamese control. In Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge was engaged in 
killing thousands of anticommunists. (I did not know then how indis­
criminately they would kill, including all who were educated or were not 
part of their peasant revolution.) Thailand would get the People's 
Republic of China on its side as an insurance against invasion by the 
Vietnamese communists. Kissinger asked whether the PRC would help 
the Thais. I thought it would. I suggested it was best to keep cool and 
watch how events evolved. If at the next election a president like 
McGovern were to be elected and gave in to the communists, the situa­
tion could become hopeless. 
Ford had been portrayed as a bumbler and stumbler, an American 
football player who had injured his head too many times. I found him to 
be a shrewd man with common sense who knew how to size up the people 
he had to deal with. He was genuinely friendly with an easy informality. 
After dinner, when I asked to be excused to go to the restroom, he insisted 
on bringing me to his private quarters. So up the elevator we went, fol­
lowed by his secret service bodyguards . There, in a vast private bathroom, 
was a whole array of exercise equipment, the latest of body-building and 
America : The Anticommunist Anchorman 469 
keep-fit instruments, and all his toiletries and shaving gadgets spread 
over the washbasins. I could not imagine any European, Japanese, or 
Third World leader bringing me to his private bathroom to freshen up. 
He was just a friendly man, happy to have me as his guest and grateful 
that there was one person from Southeast Asia who spoke up for America 
as its stocks went down with the hasty evacuation of Saigon. He was not 
out to impress me, but he did-as a solid, dependable man. 
29. Strategic Accord with the United States 
When President Jimmy Carter took over from Gerald Ford, there was an 
abrupt change of emphasis in U.S. foreign and defense policies. He was 
more interested in Africa than Asia. To the dismay of America's friends 
and allies in Asia, he announced that there would be a rundown of U.S. 
troops in Korea. Carter believed Americans were tired after the Vietnam 
War and wanted to forget Asia. He concentrated on the reconciliation of 
black and white Americans. He also saw his role as a builder of bridges 
across the great divide between the whites and the blacks in southern 
Africa. His emphasis was on human rights, not defense and security. 
Asean leaders braced themselves for four difficult years as they waited to 
see what he would actually do. 
When I met him in October 1977, he had budgeted his time meticu­
lously. There would be a 5-minute photo opportunity, then a IO-minute 
tete-a-tete followed by a 45-minute discussion between the two dele­
gations. He kept to this schedule almost to the second. What astounded 
me was the subject he raised during the IO-minute tete-a-tete-why 
did Singapore want high-tech weapons like I-Hawk (Improved Hawk) 
ground-to-air missiles? It was not an item in my brief. No previous presi­
dent had ever queried me on our modest purchases of weapons, let alone 
defensive ones. High on Carter's agenda was the stopping of arms prolifer­
ation, especially high-tech weapons, and I-Hawk was considered high­
tech for Southeast Asia. I said that Singapore was a very compact urban 
target which had to be thickly defended. Our Bloodhound missiles were 
472 From Third World to First 
out of date, but if he had difficulty selling I-Hawks to us, I would buy 
British Rapier missiles; it was not a matter of great importance. To cut 
the matter short, I said we would not apply to buy them. Two years later, 
they sold us I-Hawk missiles after the U.S. ambassador in Singapore, a 
former Democratic governor of North Dakota and a Carter supporter, 
intervened with the White House. 
The official delegations met for 45 minutes and finished to the second. 
He had a laundry list which he pulled out from his shirt-pocket some 15 
minutes before the end to check if he had covered all the items. Without 
rereading the minutes of the meeting, I would have had no recollection of 
what we discussed . They were all inconsequential matters. His predeces­
sors, Johnson, Nixon, and Ford, had always covered the broad picture: how 
did Asia look-Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, then the communist 
countries of China and Vietnam, then U.S. allies Thailand and the 
Philippines. 
Carter did not raise these subjects. Nevertheless, I decided to give 
him a broad-brush picture of how important America was for the stability 
and growth of the region, and how it should not lose its focus as this 
might weaken the confidence of noncommunist countries who were its 
friends. I am not sure I made any impression . Had I not met Richard 
Holbrooke, assistant secretary of state for East Asia and the Pacific, earlier 
in May in Singapore, I doubt if I would have had a meeting with Carter. 
Holbrooke wanted someone from the region to get him to concentrate on 
Asia, and thought I could be that someone. 
When I was leaving, he gave me a green leather-bound copy of his 
campaign autobiograph y, Why Not the Best? He had already inscribed it, 
"To my good friend Lee Kuan Yew. Jimmy Carter." I was flattered but 
surprised by my elevation to "good friend" even before he had met me. 
This must have been standard practice during his election campaign. 
I scanned his book, hoping to get some light. I did. He was from the 
Bible belt, a born-again Christian. Two items stick in my mind. His 
father had given him a coin on his way to Sunday school. He came back 
and put two coins on the dressing table. When his father discovered this, 
he was given a whipping. He never stole again! I was puzzled how this 
helped him win his campaign. The other was when Admiral Rickover 
interviewed him for duty on a nuclear submarine. Rickover asked him 
Strategic Accord with the United States 473 
what his position was in his class at Annapolis Naval Academy. He 
proudly said 59th. Rickover asked, "Did you do your best?'' He replied, 
"Yes, Sir," then changed it co "No, Sir, I didn't always do my best." 
Rickover said, "Why not?" Career said he was shaken. Hence the title of 
his book, Why Not the Best? And Carter set out co live by this motto. One 
day, I saw him on television staggering at the end of a marathon race, near 
exhaustion and collapse. He was driven by chis ambition co do his best, 
regardless of his physical condition at chat time. 
I met him again briefly in October 1978. Vice President Walter 
Mondale received me and Carter dropped by for a photo opportunity. We 
did not have much of an exchange; he was still not interested in Asia. It 
was fortunate chat his advisers persuaded him not co withdraw U.S. 
troops from Korea. 
His great achievement was co get Egyptian President Anwar Sadat 
and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin co settle their war. I was 
amazed chat he had memorized every disputed well, hedge, and border 
between the two countries. I thought of the Shell appraisal system-heli­
copter quality, seeing the broad picture and having the ability co focus on 
relevant details. Carter focused on every detail. 
Three major events in 1979 concentrated Carter's mind on Asia 
toward the end of his term of office. First, Deng Xiaoping visited him in 
late January to establish diplomatic relations and alerted him on China's 
intention co punish Vietnam for occupying Cambodia. Second, Carter 
advised the Shah of Iran to leave his country in the face of a popular 
revolt. Instead of a democratic human rights government, the ayatollahs 
cook over in February. Third, on 24 December, the Soviet Union invaded 
Afghanistan in support of a communist regime unable co sustain itself. 
Carter was so shocked chat he said, "The scales fell off my eyes." He had 
not seen the Soviet regime for what it was. He had embraced Brezhnev at 
Vienna in 1979 after signing the SALT treaty and had believed that the 
Soviet leaders were reasonable people who would respond co sincere ges­
tures of peace. 
Career's national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, was a reassur­
ing figure at the power center. He had a broad strategic mind and saw the 
value of China in the overall balance against the Soviet Union and as a 
check on Vietnam's becoming coo much of a cool of the Soviets. He could 
474 From Third World to First 
put his views forcefully across in any forum, but was wise enough to 
carry out his president's foreign policy, not his own. Aid from the United 
States and many Muslim nations poured arms, money, and fighters into 
Afghanistan to strengthen the resistance groups that eventuall y bogged 
down the forces of the mighty Soviet Union. 
Holbrooke was able to moderate Carter's early impulses to cut U.S. 
commitments in Asia, especially in Korea where he wanted to pull out 
40,000 U.S. troops after losses in Vietnam. As I wrote to Holbrooke in 
December 1980 before he left his post, " ... During a period when many 
in the Administration, in Congress, and in the media wanted to forget 
Southeast Asia, you worked ceaselessly to rebuild and to restore confi­
dence in U.S. strength and purposes. The future appears less in jeopardy 
than it did in 1977 when we first met." 
Carter was a good, God-fearing man, perhaps too good to be president. 
Americans voted for him on the rebound after the excesses of Watergate. 
But after four years of pious musings about America's malaise, they were 
ready to embrace Ronald Reagan whose bright and upbeat view of 
Americans and their future was to carry them forward in good spirits for 
two presidential terms. Reagan was a man of simple, straightforward 
ideas, a strong and successful leader. He turned out to be good for 
America and the world. It was as well that in November 1980 Americans 
voted for a Hollywood actor instead of a peanut farmer. 
I first met him when, as governor of California, he visited Singapore 
in October 1971. He had a letter of introduction from President Nixon. 
California was Nixon's home state and Reagan must have played a key 
role in Nixon's election. In a 30-minute discussion before lunch, I found 
him a man of strong convictions, resolutely anticommunist. He talked 
about the Vietnam War and Soviet troublemaking all over the world. At 
lunch for him and his wife, young son, and personal aide, Mike Deaver, he 
kept the conversation on the Soviet peril. He was so interested that he 
wanted to continue the discussion after lunch. His wife and son left and I 
took him back to my office where we spent another hour on strategic 
issues relating to the Soviet Union and China. Some of his views were 
startling and vivid. He said that during the Berlin blockade, the United 
Strategic Accord with the United States 475 
States should not have flown supplies in but should have confronted the 
Russians with tanks and demanded that the road to Berlin be opened, as 
required in the Four-Power Agreeme nt. If they did not open the road, 
then war. I was taken aback by his black-and-white approach. 
Ten years later, in March 1981, former President Gerald Ford visited 
Singapore to tell me that President Reagan, who had been inaugurated 
that January, wanted to meet me, and soon. I received a second message to 
ask if I could go in June, and I did. When I arrived at the White House 
about noon on June 19, Reagan was at the porch of his office wing and 
received me warmly. We had a one-on-one meeting for 20 minutes before 
lunch. He wanted to talk about Taiwan and China. 
I told Reagan that it was in America's interest to have a Taiwan which 
was successful to provide a constant contrast to conditions on the main­
land. This would have far-reaching and worldwide impact through the 
media and VIPs who visited both sides. He then asked me whether 
President Chiang Ching-kuo needed new-generation aircraft. Chiang was 
pressing for them at a sensitive time in Reagan's presidency . Reagan had 
been highly critical of the People's Republic of China (PRC) during his 
election campaign and had made known his staunch support for Taiwan. I 
knew that any sudden switch of policy would be difficult for him. 
However, to allow sales to Taiwan of new-generation aircraft would up the 
stakes with China. I gave him my opinion that there was no immediate 
threat to Taiwan from the mainland, and that Taiwan's present F-Ss were 
adequate. China was not increasing its armaments. Deng Xiaoping 
wanted more consumer goods for his people who were demoralized and 
starved of creature comforts after a decade of the Cultural Revolution. 
Taiwan's aircraft would need to be upgraded later, not immediate ly. 
His key advisers joined us for lunch: Caspar Weinberger from defense, 
Bill Casey from the CIA, Jim Baker, his chief of staff, Mike Deaver, and 
Richard Allen, his national security adviser. The key subject was China­
China vis-a-vis Taiwan and China vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. 
He asked about the PRC's overture to the Soviet Union on their com­
mon border problems immediately after Secretary of State Alexander 
Haig had visited Beijing. In my view, this move by the Chinese was to 
give notice to the United States that they should not be taken for granted. 
I did not, however, believe that the PRC and the Soviet Union could 
476 From Third World to First 
make much headway given their deep and abiding conflict of interests. 
Both were communist evangelists, each maneuvring against the other to 
win Third World support. Furthermore, Deng had to accommodate those 
around him who did not want to get too close to America. I believed 
Deng was quite set on his policy, which was to give low priority to mili­
tary spending and high priority to consumer goods the people needed. 
Referring to the unrest in Poland, Reagan said the Russians must be 
worried about being overextended. I said they were prepared to let the 
economy go down to preserve their "empire which extended across 
Eurasia." Reagan's ears pricked up at the word "empire." He told Richard 
Allen to use that word more frequently when describing the Soviet 
domain. Reagan's next speech referred to the "evil empire" of the Soviets. 
In the last 10 minutes, in a one-on-one discussion after lunch, he 
asked me to convey a message to President Chiang not to press him at 
that moment for high-tech weapons as it was a difficult time for him. He 
asked me to assure Chiang that he would not let him down. Reagan knew 
that I was close to Chiang and would help to soften the disappointment 
his message would cause. I met Chiang a few days later to give him 
Reagan's message that the time was inappropriate for Taiwan's purchase of 
high-tech weapons such as aircraft. Chiang asked me why his good friend 
Reagan could not be more helpful. I hazarded a guess that America 
needed the PRC to maintain a global balance of forces against the Soviet 
Union. As the West Europeans and Japanese were not willing to spend on 
armaments as decisively as America wanted, Reagan was considering 
whether to upgrade China's military capabilities with small injections of 
technology, which with China's huge manpower would mean added pres­
sure on the Soviet Union. Chiang nodded his agreement. He accepted 
that Reagan had a valid reason, and asked me to tell him, "I understand 
you." Chiang was satisfied. He trusted Reagan. 
Like Chiang, Reagan went by his gut instincts. He either trusted you 
or he did not. He was also a man of deep and abiding loyalties, both to his 
friends and to his cause. His advisers, including his first secretary of state, 
Al Haig, had told him of the importance of communist China in the 
grand strategy against the Soviet Union. He accepted this analysis but 
was not comfortable with the Chinese communists. He had inherited a 
relationship with China he knew he had to maintain. 
Strategic Accord with the United States 477 
I left Washington feeling more confident than when Carter was presi­
dent. Reagan had a natural optimism that infused all those around him 
with the same "can do" spirit. He looked at the sunny side of every issue 
and was prepared to stand up for his beliefs. More important, he was able 
to carry the American people with him, often in spite of the media. When 
I wrote to thank him for the lunch, Reagan's reply was substantive. One 
paragraph read: "I want [U.S.} relations with Peking to improve and will 
work hard to achieve this, but not at the expense of our old friends on 
Taiwan. Nor do I want you, our partners in Southeast Asia, to view our 
association with Peking as taking precedence over our relations with 
you." When his administration announced its decision on U.S. arms sales 
to Taiwan, it did not include the sale of advanced fighter aircraft on the 
grounds that "no military need for such aircraft exists." 
Ten months later, in April 1982, Vice President George Bush saw me 
in Singapore before going to China. He wanted my views on how to 
approach the PRC-Taiwan issue. I said the issues were so complex that I 
was sure the Chinese did not believe they could be resolved by his visit. 
What was important was for the forms to be observed. The PRC would 
have studied Reagan's character and views thoroughly . They knew of his 
many trips to Taiwan and of his friendship with President Chiang Ching­
kuo. Because Reagan was what he was, for the Chinese, form was as 
important as substance. They knew they could not get Taiwan back for a 
long time. However, the principle that Taiwan is a part of China should 
not be challenged or there would be trouble. I was sure that Deng needed 
America-he had visited America in January 1979 to settle normaliza­
tion because he needed America on China's side, or at least to be neutral 
in any conflict with the Soviet Union. Deng also knew that he was deal­
ing with a tough-minded leader in Reagan. 
Bush asked whether there was domestic opposition in China to the 
PRC's relationship with the United States. I believed China's relationship 
with America had received the imprimatur of Mao himself, so few would 
openly oppose having good relations with America. Deng had not only 
normalized relations but gone one step further by opening up the country. 
This would have important long-term consequences. The leaders' sons 
were studying in the United States, as were many other Chinese. There 
would be a brain drain, maybe 20 percent or more, but those who 
478 From Third World to First 
returned would come back with fresh ideas. The Chinese knew they were 
running a risk in opening up, so the decision they had made was signifi­
cant. They were prepared to have the students come back with radical 
ideas, carrying with them the germs of change. A difficult problem was 
that as a presidential candidate Reagan had made strong statements in 
support of Taiwan. And he had repeated them even after George Bush 
went to Beijing in August 1980 to tell the Chinese they should under­
stand and respect the U.S. position, that it had to move gradually on 
Taiwan. Yet I believed the Chinese placed great importance on fidelity. 
They knew that people who betrayed their friends would also betray 
them. They would be surprised if the United States were to give way if 
they pushed on Taiwan. What they wanted from the United States was a 
reaffirmation of the principle that there was one China. Bush assured me 
that Reagan was not going to set the clock back by having two separate 
states and two ambassadors. 
I suggested that the United States invite Premier Zhao Ziyang to 
visit Washington and then President Reagan should visit Beijing to put 
his position in the way Bush had expressed it. The Americans should con­
vince Beijing of their one China policy. The way to do this was for Reagan 
to meet and convince Deng that that was America's basic position. Bush 
agreed, as Reagan could say what he meant in a convincin g way. There 
was much common ground between China and the United States, Bush 
added. Reagan was "paranoid and uptight about the Soviet Union" and 
events in Poland and Afghanistan had reinforced this. Reagan did not like 
communism but saw the strategic value of a relationship with China. 
By my next visit to Washington in July 1982, George Shultz had suc­
ceeded Al Haig as secretary of state. I knew Shultz when he was secretary 
of the treasury under President Nixon in the early 1970s and we had 
become friends. Haig had gone all out to forge a "strategic consensus " 
against the Soviet Union and had agreed to reduce arms sales to Taiwan 
gradually . Shultz had to settle the form of words that would spell out this 
promise. He tossed a few questions at me. I said there was little value in 
leaving Taiwan militarily naked and at China's mercy in order to use 
China's weight against the Soviet Union. China would be against the 
Soviets anyway. Shultz had a more sober assessment of China's value in the 
balance against the Soviets. He implemented a much more calibrated and 
Strategic Accord with the United States 479 
measured policy that did not require the United States to abandon its 
obligation s to an old ally. 
Again, Reagan took me aside before lunch for a one-on-one discussion 
with no note takers. He discussed China and Taiwan, and China and the 
Soviet Union. I said he did not have to sell out the Taiwanese, even 
though he needed China against the Soviet Union. The two objectives 
were not irreconcilable. They could be managed and contained. 
He knew that I had met the top Chinese leaders both on the mainland 
and in Taiwan. He also knew I was anticommunist but a realist. So he 
tested his ideas on me. I told him to put the Taiwan issue aside as a dis­
pute which could not be resolved for the time being and should be left 
for the next generation , as Deng had suggested to the Japanese regard­
ing their dispute over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands. I suggested Reagan 
should explain to Beijing that he had been a very old friend of Taiwan and 
could not simply write them off. He asked if he should visit China. He 
was personally reluctant to go and felt he would be obliged to visit 
Taiwan on the same trip if he did decide to go. I was astounded to hear 
this. I advised against a visit to Taiwan, especially on the same trip. As I 
had earlier said to Bush, Reagan should first invite either Premier Zhao 
Ziyang or General Secretary Hu Yaobang to Washington before he visited 
China. After one or both of them had visited the United States, a return 
visit by him would be an appropriate response. 
Reagan later wrote to say, "Our private talk before lunch on 21 July 
was of great benefit to me. I have come to expect wise counsel and advice 
from you and that is just what I received on that occasion. Your frankness 
and candor really proved the strength of our friendship which I value so 
highly." 
In early 1984, Premier Zhao visited Washington and stressed that 
China wanted closer economic relations. In May, Reagan visited China. 
Soon after that, Paul Wolfowitz, assistant to Shultz, came to Singapore to 
brief me on Reagan's visit and to discuss certain aspects of the visit the 
Americans had found difficult to understand. It had been a good trip with 
real progress made in the economic field. Reagan had not yielded on 
global issues when the Chinese disagreed with him. Deng had empha­
sized that Taiwan was a knot in U.S.-PRC relations that had to be untied. 
I said it was good that Deng had had an opportunity to get a feel of 
480 From Third World to First 
Ronald Reagan. The Chinese would have realized that they had to live 
with Reagan, not just for one but for two terms. Indeed, Reagan did win 
a second term. 
After Reagan's reelection, Shultz proposed that I make an official visit 
to Washington in early October 1985. I found Reagan in good form. He 
looked youthful, with a good head of hair and a strong voice none the 
worse after four years in office and a bullet through his chest that had nar­
rowly missed his heart. Reagan did not have a mind for detail. Indeed, he 
made clear that he did not want to be bothered with details which could 
confuse the big picture. His strengths were constancy and tenacity of pur­
pose. He knew what he wanted and set out to achieve it by surrounding 
himself with able people who shared his thinking and were successful in 
their chosen fields. And he exuded confidence and optimism. The eight 
years of the Reagan presidency were good years for America and the 
world. His "Star Wars" program confronted President. Gorbachev and the 
Soviet Union with a challenge they could not hope to meet. That helped 
to dismantle the Soviet Union. 
As before, in a one-on-one meeting, he sought my views on China and 
Taiwan. He said he had been walking a careful line between the PRC and 
Taiwan. He had made clear to the PRC that the United States would not 
walk away from Taiwan: "The U.S. was a friend of both and would remain 
in that position." Then he asked me to persuade President Chiang to have 
Taiwan remain in the Asian Development Bank (ADB) after its designa­
tion was changed to "Taipei, China" when the PRC was admitted to the 
ADB. Chiang had wanted to withdraw from the ADB, and Congress had 
threatened to withhold American contributions if Taiwan was "expelled. " 
Later, I had a difficult time in Taipei putting Reagan's case to Chiang but 
in the end good sense prevailed. In January 1986, the PRC became an 
ADB member and Taiwan was renamed "Taipei, China." 
Reagan had observed during his visit to China the previous year that the 
Chinese had begun to recognize that they must give opportun ities to their 
people to create a better life. I said this was a tribute to what the United 
States had achieved in Taiwan through the free flow of capital, technology, 
expertise, goods, and services. I was certain Deng had read of the tremendous 
economic development of Taiwan and must have wondered how people 
whom he regarded as a gang of "effete, corrupt and useless bandits" were able 
Strategic Accord with the United States 481 
to make the grade. Deng must have thought that the United States had 
helped these "bandits" with capital, technology, and know-how and he 
would dearly like to have this formula passed on to China. Deng knew 
America could be invaluable for China's modernization. 
During my official visit, I was given the honor of addressing a joint 
session of the U.S. Congress. The legislators of the world's most powerful 
nation gave time to a leader of a tiny island. Tommy Koh, our ambas­
sador, reported that both Reagan and Shultz had encouraged Speaker Tip 
O'Neill to invite me. I spoke on an issue then at the top of the American 
agenda-pr otectionism to safeguard jobs and check growing U.S. trade 
deficits with newly emerging economies of East Asia. In 20 minutes, I 
described how the issue of free trade was really the question of war or 
peace for the world. 
Nations wax and wane. I argued that if a nation on the rise, with an 
excess of energy, was not allowed to export its goods and services, its only 
alternativ e would be to expand and capture territory, incorporate the pop­
ulation, and integrate it to make for a bigger economic unit. That was 
why nations had empires which they controlled as one trading bloc. It was 
a time-honored way for growth. The world had moved away from that 
after the end of World War II in 1945. GATT, the IMF, the World Bank, 
and new rules made possible a prosperous and dynamic Germany in spite 
of large numbers of Germans returning from the East into a shrunken 
land area. So also with the Japanese, who had to leave Korea, China, 
Taiwan, and Southeast Asia and be packed into a few Japanese islands. 
The Germans and the Japanese were able to stay within their boundaries 
and grow through trade and investments. They cooperated and competed 
with other nations and were able to prosper and flourish without wars. 
But if trade in goods and services was blocked, then China would revert to 
its historical solution of small warring states conquering one another 
to gain control of more territory and people until they became one colos­
sal continental empire. This tight, logical exposition may have convinced 
the legislators intellectually, but many found it emotionally difficult to 
accept. 
Another problem Reagan raised during our discussions was the 
Philippines. President Marcos had been in difficulties ever since exiled 
opposition leader Benigno Aquino was shot and killed at Manila Airport 
482 From Third World to First 
on his return from the United States in August 1983. Marcos had been 
Reagan's good friend and political supporter. When Shultz earlier dis­
cussed the matter with me, I said Marcos was now the problem, not the 
solution. He asked me to speak frankly to Reagan who was most unhappy 
at the prospect of abandoning an old friend. So, as gently as I could, I 
described to Reagan how Marcos had changed from the young anticom­
munist crusader of the 1960s to become a self-indulgent aging ruler who 
allowed his wife and cronies to clean out the country through ingenious 
monopolies and had put the government heavily in debt. The credit rat­
ings of the Philippines and his government had plummeted. Reagan was 
most unhappy to hear my assessment. I suggested the problem was how 
to find a neat and graceful way for Marcos to leave and have a new govern­
ment installed which could begin to clean up the mess. He decided to 
send an emissary to express U.S. concern to Marcos at the deteriorating 
situation. 
The Philippines blew up on 15 February 1986, after the Marcos reelec­
tion as president was challenged as fraudulent. The American ambassador , 
Stapleton Roy, was instructed to seek my views. I said that the United 
States had to deal with Marcos whether he was constitutionally installed or 
not, but should not alienate the bulk of the Filipino people, many of whom 
had voted for Corazan Aquino. I said America should not accept a fraudu­
lent election but should put pressure on Marcos, not to lead to a showdown 
but to fresh elections. Aquino should be kept "mobilised and in a dynamic 
state" because she was a "force for good." She should not be allowed to 
despair. 
The next day, 16 February, Corazon Aquino claimed victory and 
announced a program of nationwide nonviolent protest to bring down the 
Marcos regime. In a joint move, the Philippines' five Asean neighbors 
issued similar statements to express their concern over the critical situa­
tion in the Philippines which could lead to bloodshed and civil war, and 
called for a peaceful resolution. 
I told Ambassador Roy that Marcos should know the door was open 
for him to leave. If he felt he had no place to go to, he might fight it out. 
On 25 February, Roy told me his government agreed with my views and 
asked whether I would be willing to undertake the task of coordinating 
an Asean approach to offer Marcos asylum. Raja, our foreign minister, said 
Strategic Accord with the Unit ed States 483 
it would be difficult to get all five Asean members to agree. I immedi­
ately sent Marcos, through our ambassador in Manila, an invitation to 
come to Singapore. It was an offer that, if accepted, would help diffuse the 
dangerous situation that then prevailed. At the same time, Reagan sent a 
private message to him not to use force and said he had arranged for him, 
his relatives, and associates to be given asylum in Hawaii. Marcos 
accepted asylum in Hawaii in preference to Singapore. That same day, 25 
February, Aquino was sworn in as the new president of the Philippines. 
A few days after he arrived in Honolulu, Marcos had his baggage, 
which included cases of new peso banknotes, inspected by American cus­
toms. He sensed trouble and sent me a message that he wanted to come to 
Singapore. Aquino, who had already taken over as president, objected. 
Marcos stayed on in Hawaii to face multiple lawsuits. 
One problem the United States had with President Aquino was the 
renewal of the lease for the U.S. military bases in the Philippines. She had 
taken a strong antibases stand hoping to get more concessions. This was 
to rebound on her. When she finally came to an agreement with the 
United States, the Philippine senate rejected it; the senators said that the 
U.S. bases diminished their sense of nationhood. 
Senator Richard Lugar, the senior Republican leader in the senate for­
eign relations committee with special interest in defense, visited me in 
Singapore in January 1989 after discussions with President Aquino in 
Manila. He asked whether we could help if the United States had to leave 
Subic Bay. I said we could offer the use of our base facilities but warned 
that the whole of Singapore was smaller than what the United States had 
in Subic. We did not have the space to accommodate U.S. servicemen. I 
urged him to have U.S. bases remain in the Philippines, adding that 
Singapore would publicly offer the United States the use of our bases if 
that would make the Philippine government feel less isolated internation­
ally and more willing to allow U.S. bases to stay. 
Our ambassador in Manila raised this question with the Philippine 
foreign secretary, Raul Manglapus, who said he would welcome such a 
public statement. I asked our minister of state for foreign affairs, George 
Yeo, to state publicly in August 1989 that we would be willing to give 
484 From Third World to First 
U.S. forces increased use of our bases. After this statement, Manglapus 
replied that "Singapore must be singled out and appreciated for its forth­
right position." Later, President Aquino told me my stand was helpful. 
Malaysia and Indonesia were unenthusiastic. The Malaysian defense 
minister, Rithauddeen, said that Singapore should not jeopardize the sta­
tus quo by allowing an increase of foreign forces in the region. The 
Indonesian foreign minister, Ali Alatas, hoped Singapore would continue 
to support the idea of a nuclear weapons-free zone in Southeast Asia, 
adding that Indonesia would oppose the offer if it amounted to a new base. 
At a televised National Day Rally on 20 August 1989, I said that 
there would not be any new bases with large numbers of U.S. troops. 
Singapore did not have the space. We were offering access to our existing 
bases which would remain under the control of the Singapore govern­
ment; they would not become American bases. I, too, was in favor of a 
nuclear weapons-free zone and of a zone of peace, freedom, and neutrality, 
proposed by Indonesia and Malaysia, respective ly. But if oil and gas were 
found in the Spratlys, it would not be such a zone of peace. Earlier that 
August I had met both President Suharto and Prime Minister Mahathir 
in Brunei and clarified the size and nature of my offer. 
The U.S. government took up the offer. While in Tokyo for the 
installation of Emperor Akihito, I signed a memorandum of understand­
ing (MOU) with Vice President Dan Quayle on 13 November 1990, two 
weeks before I resigned as prime minister. It turned out to be of more 
value than either the United States or Singapore had foreseen. When the 
Americans left their bases in the Philippines in September 1991, Singa­
pore's facilities gave U.S. forces a toehold in Southeast Asia. 
Regional perceptions of the value of American access to Singapore 
facilities underwent a sea change after China published maps in 1992 that 
included the Spratlys as part of China. Three Asean countries (Malaysia, 
Brunei, and the Philippines) had also claimed these islands. That 
November, Ali Alatas said that Indonesia had no difficulty in seeing the 
merits of U.S. access to Singapore's military facilities. 
I first met George Bush in June 1981 when he was vice president to 
Reagan. Our excellent relations did not change when he became presi-
Strategic Accord with the Unit ed States 485 
dent. I knew him as an exceptionally warm and friendly man. Back in 
1982, when he knew I was travelling to Washington to meet Reagan, he 
invited me to stay with him at Kennebunkport, Maine, where he was 
vacationing for the summer. I thanked him but declined because I was 
meeting my daughter Ling, then in Boston working at the Massachusetts 
General Hospital. He sent back a message to bring her along and clearly 
meant it. So we all stayed the weekend with him. Ling and I went jog­
ging with him together with his secret service squad. We talked freely on 
politics and generally had a relaxed time. Barbara Bush was as friendly as 
her husband-outgoing, hospitable, and warm, with no pretensions. Like 
him, she was genuinely happy to have friends stay with them for a long 
weekend and made us feel welcome. 
After Iraq invaded and occupied Kuwait in 1990, to build up their 
forces in the Gulf, the United States had to move half a million troops to 
the Gulf area swiftly. The MOU had not yet been signed but we allowed 
U.S. aircraft and naval vessels carrying troops and materiel across the 
Pacific to transit through Singapore. We also sent a medical team to Saudi 
Arabia to show our support for this action in the Gulf. Indonesia and 
Malaysia stayed neutral. Their Muslim majorities wanted solidarity with 
and sympathy for Saddam Hussein and the Iraqis. 
I visited President Bush in the White House on 21 January 1991 as 
Operation Desert Storm was moving toward its spectacular conclusion with 
American, British, and French forces encircling Iraqi forces. We spent the 
evening in his private quarters with Brent Scowcroft, his national security 
adviser, discussing the broader Arab-Israeli situation. I congratulated him 
on his success in marshalling the broad coalition of forces in support of this 
operation, including the Arab states of Egypt, Syria, Morocco, and the Gulf. 
I cautioned, however, that the Muslim world had rallied to Saddam Hussein 
even though he was in the wrong. The Israelis kept building more settle­
ments on the West Bank, and this had inflamed Arab and Muslim opinion. 
America's allies and friends were alarmed. Somewhere down the road there 
would be an explosion. I urged America's public support for a Middle East 
solution fair to both Palestinians and Israelis, to show that it was not sup­
porting the Israelis, whether they were right or wrong. 
We next met when Bush visited Singapore in January 1992 on his 
way to Australia and Japan. His problems with China had increased after 
486 From Third World to First 
Tiananmen on 4 June 1989. It was election year and he was under pres­
sure, including from liberals in his own Republican Party. To maintain 
his China policy, he needed concessions from China in areas such as the 
release of detained Tiananmen protest leaders, nuclear proliferation, long­
range missiles, and trade. He was facing increasing difficulty in uphold­
ing his veto on Congress's resolution to withdraw China's Most Favored 
Nation (MFN) status. As President Yang Shangkun was coming to 
Singapore, Bush wanted me to ask him to take unilateral action in releas­
ing prisoners to show conciliation. 
I saw President Yang two days later and conveyed the message. Yang 
said U.S. pressure on human rights was an excuse to impose on China its 
political system and its values of freedom and democracy. This was not 
acceptable. 
When Bush lost the election to Bill Clinton that November, I felt we 
were in for a change of attitudes and styles. Clinton had promised "an 
America that will not coddle tyrants, from Baghdad to Beijing." Many of 
Clinton's supporters acted as if China were a Third World aid recipient 
country amenable to diplomatic and economic pressure. Life was not 
going to be easy for China or for America. 
30. America's New Agenda 
Singapore's relationship with the United States falls neatly into two 
parts--during and after the Cold War. When the Soviet Union posed a 
threat to America and the world, we had good relations with both the 
Democrat and Republican administrations from Johnson in the 1960s to 
Bush in the 1990s. Our strategic interests coincided completely . The 
United States was against the Soviet Union and communist China. So 
were we. Furthermore, we were strongly in support of a U.S. military 
presence in East Asia. 
The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 marked the beginning of the end 
of the Cold War, but the effects of this geopolitical change were felt only 
in the Clinton presidency from 1993. With the arrival of an anti-Vietnam 
War generation in the White House, human rights and democracy, which 
had been subsidiary issues, became all-important. The U.S. government 
supported a Russian Federation under President Yeltsin that said it 
wanted to democratize. It spoke of Russia as its friend and ally, and of 
China as its potential adversary. We were not at odds with the United 
States over Russia, whatever our doubts about its democratic future. But 
we distanced ourselves from its hostile rhetoric against China. We feared 
that talking and acting as if China were an enemy would make it into one. 
We did not want this to happen; no country in Southeast Asia wanted to 
go out of its way to make China an enemy. This was a time when America 
wanted to scale down its presence in Southeast Asia, and Singapore was no 
longer as useful as before. 
488 From Third World to First 
Many Americans thought that with the collapse of communism in 
the Soviet Union, China's communist system would not endure, and that 
it was America's moral duty to bring about its end. There were two 
approaches: one, favored by President Bush, to encourage gradual change 
through a process of constructive engagement; the other, favored by the 
U.S. Congress, to impose sanctions and apply political and economic pres­
sure for human rights and political reform. Bush imposed some sanctions 
on China after Tiananmen, but was soon under pressure to deny MFN 
(Most Favored Nation) status for Chinese goods imported into America. 
Congress passed resolutions to deny MFN to China until it improved its 
human rights performance. Bush vetoed them, and this became an annual 
ritual that has persisted. 
The promotion of democracy and human rights has always been a part 
of U.S. foreign policy. But during the Cold War, a shared strategic inter­
est in resisting communist expansion in Southeast Asia set the tone in 
bilateral relations. Singapore had its differences with the Carter adminis­
tration over democracy and human rights, and with the Reagan and Bush 
administrations on issues of press freedom, but these differences were not 
pursued in a confrontational and aggressive manner. 
For example, Patricia Derian, assistant secretary of state for humani­
tarian affairs and human rights in the Carter administration, met me in 
January 1978 to urge the abolition of detention without trial. I told her 
the law had been challenged by the opposition at every election and each 
time an overwhelming majority of the electorate had voted for us and for 
the law. Singapore was a Confucianist society which placed the interests of 
the community above those of the individual. My primary responsibility 
was the well-being of the people. I had to deal with communist subver­
sives, against whom it was not possible to get witnesses to testify in open 
court. If I followed her prescription, Singapore would come to grief. 
What could the United States do to rescue Singapore more than they were 
doing for the boat people of South Vietnam, who were then sailing out 
into the perils of pirates and the weather in the South China Sea? If the 
United States would give Singapore the status of a Puerto Rico and 
underwrite Singapore's future, I would follow her prescription. Then the 
United States would have to pick up the pieces if Singapore failed. Derian 
was so stressed that she asked if she could smoke, in spite of having been 
America's New Agenda 489 
told by her ambassador that I was allergic to it. As she could not bear her 
deprivation any longer, I took pity on her and brought her upstairs to an 
open veranda where she relieved her frustrations with long puffs on her 
cigarettes. It did not improve her arguments . Twenty years later, 
Ambassador John Holdridge, who had been present at our 1978 meeting, 
wrote in his memoirs, 
Lee Kuan Yew, whom I heard on several occasions describe himself 
as 'the last Victorian,' certainly was and is a staunch Confucianist 
as well. He and his followers have attempted to inculcate Singa­
pore's younger generation with Confucian virtues. Derian, on the 
other hand, is a veteran of the civil rights movement in the 
American South, with its frequent clashes between civil rights 
demonstr ators and local authorities, a struggle that epitomized 
the 'rights of man' beliefs inherent in the U.S. Constitution. She 
completely dismissed Lee's view that the well-being of society 
takes precedence over individual rights and that detainees in 
Singapore only needed to forswear violence to be released. The two 
talked past each other for the better part of two hours and never 
came to a meeting of the minds. 
Because we shared overriding strategic concerns , this disagreement was 
not brought into the open. 
Another instance was in June 1988 when we asked for a U.S. embassy 
diplomat to be removed for interfering in Singapore's domestic politics. 
The diplomat had instigated a former solicitor general to recruit disaf­
fected lawyers to contest the coming elections with him against the PAP, 
and had arranged for one lawyer to meet his superior officer in the State 
Department in Washington, who gave the lawyer an assurance that he 
would get asylum if he needed it. The State Department denied these 
allegations and in retaliation asked for a newly arrived Singapore diplo­
mat to be withdrawn. In a debate in Parliament, I proposed that the mat­
ter be resolved by a competent neutral international committee of three 
experts. If this committee found that what the U.S. diplomat had done 
was legitimate diplomatic activity, the Singapore government would 
withdraw its protest and apologize. The State Department spokesman 
490 From Third World to First 
welcomed my reaffirmation that Singapore wanted to put an end to the 
dispute, but remained silent on my proposal. No more was made of this. 
The issues that Americans put at the top of their agenda in the 1990s 
were human rights and democracy, and Western versus Eastern values. The 
Japanese were being pressed by the Americans to link their aid programs 
to recipient countries' democracy and human rights record. The Asahi 
Shimbun, a liberal, antiwar, pro-democracy Japanese newspaper, invited me 
to a forum in Tokyo in May 1991 to discuss the subjects of human rights 
and democracy with prominent Japanese and American opinion formula­
tors. I said it was 50 years since the British and French first gave indepen­
dence with Western-type constitutions to over 40 former British colonies 
and 25 former French colonies. Unfortuna tely, both in Asia and Africa the 
results have been poor. Even America had not succeeded in leaving a suc­
cessful democracy in the Philippines, a former colony it freed in 1945 after 
nearly 50 years' tutelage. I suggested that a people must have reached a 
high level of education and economic development, must have a sizeable 
middle class, and life must no longer be a fight for basic survival, before 
that society could work such a democratic political system. 
The following year the Asahi Shimbun forum again discussed democ­
racy and human rights, and their effect on economic development. I said 
that since different societies had developed separately for thousands of 
years in disparate ways, their ideals and norms were bound to be different. 
Therefore, it was not possible to insist that American or European stan­
dards of human rights of the late twentieth century be imposed univer­
sally. However, with satellite television, it had become increasingly diffi­
cult for any government to hide its cruelties to its own people. Slowly but 
inevitably , the community of nations would find a balance between non­
interference in another country's internal affairs and the moral right to 
insist on more civilized and humane treatment by all governments of 
their own peoples. But as societies became more open, there would be 
convergence toward a common world standard of what was acceptable. 
Inhuman , cruel, or barbaric methods would be condemned. (In the case of 
Kosovo some six years later, although NATO and a large majority of the 
UN could not accept Yugoslav President Milosevic's barbarism against 
the Albanian Kosovars, there was no unanimity that this was sufficient 
ground for intervention without the sanction of the UN Security Council. 
America's New Agenda 491 
Russia, China, and India, representing 40 percent of humanity , con­
demned the bombing of Serbia by NATO in 1999.) 
One interview I gave to the respected American journal, Foreign Affairs, 
was published in February 1994, causing a minor stir among Americans 
interested in the Asian versus Western values debate. In my answers, I 
avoided using the term "Asian values," of which there are many different 
kinds, and instead referred to Confucian values, the values that prevail in 
the cultures of China, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam, countries that used the 
Chinese script and had been influenced by Confucian literature. There are 
also some 20 million ethnic Chinese among the peoples of Southeast Asia 
whose Confucian values are not the same as the Hindu, Muslim, or Buddhist 
values of South and Southeast Asia. 
There is no Asian model as such, but there are fundamental differ­
ences between East Asian Confucian and Western liberal societies. Con­
fucian societies believe that the individual exists in the context of the 
family, extended family, friends, and wider society, and that the govern­
ment cannot and should not take over the role of the family. Many in the 
West believe that the government is capable of fulfilling the obligations 
of the family when it fails, as with single mothers. East Asians shy away 
from this approach. Singapore depends on the strength and influence of 
the family to keep society orderly and maintain a culture of thrift, hard 
work, filial piety, and respect for elders and for scholarship and learning. 
These values make for a productive people and help economic growth. 
I stressed that freedom could only exist in an orderly state, not when 
there was continuous contention or anarchy. In Eastern societies, the main 
objective is to have a well-ordered society so that everyone can enjoy free­
dom to the maximum. Parts of contemporary American society were 
totally unacceptable to Asians because they represented a breakdown of 
civil society with guns, drugs, violent crime, vagrancy, and vulgar public 
behavior. America should not foist its system indiscriminately on other 
societies where it would not work. 
Man needs a moral sense of right and wrong. There is such a thing as 
evil, and men are not evil just because they are victims of society. I said in 
Foreign Affairs that many of the social problems in the United States were 
the result of the erosion of the moral underpinnings of society and the 
diminution of personal responsibility . Some American liberal intellectuals 
492 From Third World to First 
had developed the theory that their society had advanced to a stage where 
everyone would be better off if they were allowed to do their own thing. 
This encouraged Americans to abandon a moral or ethical basis for society. 
During the Cold War, this interview would have passed unnoticed as 
an intellectual discourse . Without the solidarity forged out of our com­
mon opposition to communism, my views brought into the open the deep 
differences between American and Asian attitudes to crime and punish­
ment, and the role of government. 
Some Americans believe that I formed these opinions only after China 
became economically buoyant following its open-door policies. In fact, 
they arose from my experiences in the early 1950s when I discovered the 
cultural gulf between the Chinese-educated and the English-educated in 
Singapore. A people steeped in Chinese values had more discipline, and 
were more courteous and respectful to elders. The result was a more 
orderly society. When these values were diluted by an English education, 
the result was less vigor and discipline and more casual behavior. Worse, 
the English-educated generally lacked self-confidence because they were 
not speaking their own native language. The dramatic confrontations 
between the communist-led Chinese middle school students and my own 
government brought home these substantial differences in culture and 
ideals, represented by two different value systems. 
American liberal academics began to criticize us for our attitudes to 
the Western press circulating in Singapore. We were not following their 
pattern for development and progress, that as a country developed its free­
market economy and enjoyed prosperity, it should become more like 
America, democratic and free, with no restrictions on the press. Because 
we do not comply with their norms, American liberals will not accept 
that our government, which Singaporeans have repeatedly voted for, can 
be good. 
No critic has been able to fault the Singapore government for cor­
ruption, nepotism, or immorality . For many years in the 1990s, business 
risk-assessment organizations such as Political and Economic Risk Con­
sultancy based in Hong Kong have rated Singapore as the least corrupt 
country in Asia; Transparency International based in Berlin rated Singa­
pore as the seventh least corrupt in the world, ahead of Britain, Germany, 
and the United States. Singapore was and is different from the banana 
October 1985: 
Addr essing the joint 
session of the U.S. 
Cong ress on free trade. 
Behind me, Vice 
President George Bush 
and Speaker Tip O'N eill. 
(Copyright SPH) 
June 1988: An importan t agreement with PM Maha thir in Kuala Lumpur to 
build the Linggui dam on the Johore River. (Copyright SPH) 
September l ')88: Ch1111:se Commu111sc Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang 
ho�rn1g d11111er ac Uiauylnai, Heijing, 011 n1y (i'.:>ch birthday. (SM Lu, (,u/leaiun) 
January l ';)';)U: President Let Teng-hui rectiving me in Taipei. (SM Le1/J 
Collu"fiun) 
May 1990: With Margaret Thatcher and her grandson ar Chequers on my last 
offi,ial visit. "Who would have imagined that we sho11ld horh leave the highest 
office in our respective countries on al most the same day.·· she wrore later rh,ir 
Novemher. (C(Jpyri!!,hf SPH) 
September 1990: Goh Chok Tong, Wong Kan Seng, and I met a harassed President Mikhail Gorbachev in the Kremlin. (Copyright SPH) 
1990: With 
President 
Fran�ois 
Mitterrand 
at the Elysee 
Palace, Paris. 
(CoJ1yrir,ht 
SPH) 1990: 
Receiving 
Chinese 
Premier Li 
Peng at 
the lstana. 
(Copyr ight 
SPH) 
1994: With Jiang 
Zemin at the 
lstana poolside 
barbecue dinner. 
Loong is in the 
background. (SM 
Lee's Collection) 
February 1996: Greeting 
French Presidenr Jacques 
Chirac in Singapore. 
(Copyrixht SPH) 1995: Posing for .i hancl­
shake wich rhe Plt'n (Fan 
t.h11ang Pi) in Diaoymai 
Beijing. (SM l..ee:r 
1 f/// ect inn) 
Seprember 1999: Wirh 
Chint'se Premier 7.hu 
Rongji ar 7.hon,i.:nan hai, 
Beijing. (SM Ln-:r 
Cnllection) 
September 1999: Cabinet meeting with Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong in the chair. (Copyright SPH) 
A family portrait taken during Chinese New Year's Eve, February 4, 2000. 
(Copyright SPH) 
America's New Agenda 493 
republics that they usually label "authoritarian ." To show their disap­
proval the American press describes Singapore as "antisepticall y clean." A 
Singapore that is efficient is called "soullessly efficient. " 
Harvard political science professor, Samuel Huntington, in an address 
in Taipei in August 1995, contrasted the Singapore model with the 
democratic model in Taiwan. He quoted a New York Times headline which 
summed up the difference between "clean and mean" Singapore and 
"filthy and free" Taiwan. He concluded, "The freedom and creativity that 
President Lee has introduced here in Taiwan will survive him. The hon­
esty and efficiency that Senior Minister Lee has brought to Singapore are 
likely to follow him to his grave. In some circumstances, authoritarianism 
may do well in the short term, but experience clearly shows that only 
democrac y produces good government over the long haul." 
Americans and Europeans were justifiably triumphant and exultant 
after their success in helping to dissolve the Soviet Union by pressing for 
human rights and democracy under the Helsinki Accords. But they were 
unrealistic in hoping to repeat the process in China. Unlike the Russians, 
the Chinese did not accept the cultural norms of the West as superior and 
to be emulated. 
One evening over dinner in Singapore in March 1992, former 
German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt asked me whether China could 
become democratic and observe human rights like the West. Choo, who 
sat next to Schmidt, laughed outright at the idea of 1.2 billion Chinese, 
30 percent of them illiterate, voting for a president. Schmidt noted this 
was her spontaneous reaction to the absurdity of it. I replied that China's 
history of over 4,000 years was one of dynastic rulers, interspersed with 
anarchy, foreign conquerors, warlords, and dictators. The Chinese people 
had never experienced a government based on counting heads instead of 
chopping off heads. Any evolution toward representative government 
would be gradual. Nearly all Third World countries were former colonies 
that, after decades of colonial rule without either elections or democracy, 
received democratic constitutions fashioned after those of their former 
rulers. But the British, French, Belgian, Portuguese, Dutch, and U.S. 
democratic institutions had taken hundreds of years to evolve. 
History teaches us that liberal democracy needs economic develop­
ment, literacy, a growing middle class, and political institutions that sup-
494 From Third World to First 
port free speech and human rights. It needs a civic society resting on 
shared values that make people with different and conflicting views will­
ing to cooperate with each other. In a civic society, between the family 
and state, there are whole series of institutions to which citizens belong, 
voluntary associations to promote specific common interests, religious 
institutions, trade unions, professional organizations, and other self-help 
bodies. 
Democracy works where the people have that culture of accommoda­
tion and tolerance which makes a minority accept the majority's right to 
have its way until the next election, and wait patiently and peacefully for 
its turn to become the government by persuading more voters to support 
its views. Where democracy was implanted in a people whose tradition 
had been to fight to the bitter end, as in South Korea, it has not worked 
well. South Koreans battle it out on the streets regardless of whether they 
have a military dictator or a democratically elected president in charge. 
Brawls in the Legislative Yuan of Taiwan, plus physical clashes in the 
streets, are reflections of their different cultures. People will evolve their 
own more or less representative forms of government , suited to their cus­
toms and culture. 
In 1994, soon after the fall of the Soviet Union, when Americans were in 
a confident mood, they tried to bring instant democracy to Haiti by rein­
stalling an ousted elected president. Five years later, the Americans quietly 
slipped out of Haiti and privately admitted defeat. Writing in the New York 
Times, American author Bob Shacochis asked, "What went wrong? Setting 
aside for the moment the culpability of the Haitian leadership, Washing­
ton's policymakers might acknowledge that in vitro democratization is a 
risky procedure. Haitian democracy , born prematurely , will not survive 
without a genuine multiparty system, which won't exist without a secure 
middle class, which can't evolve without a viable economy, which won't exist 
without credible leadership strong and wise enough to wrench the country 
out of its tailspin." Because the American administration did not publicly 
acknowledge this failure and its reasons, this will not be the last time it 
makes this mistake. 
At our discussion in March 1992, I had emphasized to Schmidt that 
it was different with human rights; technology had brought the peoples 
of the world into a global village, all watching the same atrocities on tele-
America's New Agenda 495 
vision as they happened. Because all peoples and governments want the 
respect and esteem of others, they must gradually move away from behav­
ior that made them disreputable. The next time Schmidt was in China, I 
noted that he pressed for universal standards of human rights, not of 
democracy . Later, Schmidt wrote in his newspaper, Die Zeit, that China 
could not become an instant democracy , but that the West should press 
for its human rights to become acceptable. 
The interest of America, the West, and even Japan in democracy and 
human rights for Asia springs from their concern over the outcome in 
China, not in Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong, or Singapore. America 
wanted these East Asian "tigers" to be examples to China of free societies 
that had prosperous economies because of democratic political institu­
tions. The New York Times, in the article Huntington quoted in 1995, had 
pointed out that Taiwan and Singapore were the two most successful 
Chinese societies in 5,000 years of Chinese civilization, and that one or 
the other was likely to be the model for the future of mainland China. 
This is not the case. China will chart its own way forward. It will select 
and incorporate those features and methods of government that it finds 
valuable and compatible with its own vision of its future. The Chinese 
people have a deep and abiding fear of luan (chaos). Because of their coun­
try's immense size, their leaders are extra-cautious, and will carefully test, 
adjust, and adapt before incorporating new features into their system. 
The fight between the United States and China over human rights 
and democracy focused on Hong Kong's return from Britain to China. 
The United States has economic leverage on China through Hong Kong. 
If it is not satisfied that Hong Kong is administered separately from 
China, it can cut off the separate export quotas and other benefits to Hong 
Kong. The fate of 6 million Hong Kongers will not affect America or the 
world. But the destiny of 1,200 million Chinese in China (likely to 
become 1,500 million by the year 2030) will determine the balance of 
forces in the world. Americans have joined issue with China over Hong 
Kong's "democracy " more to influence the future of China than that of 
Hong Kong. Similarly, American liberals criticize Singapore not because 
they are concerned about democracy and human rights for our 3 million 
people but because they believe we are setting the wrong example for 
China. 
496 From Third World to First 
From 1993 to 1997, Clinton's policy on China underwent a sea 
change. This was the result of a crisis caused by China's missile exercises 
in the Straits of Taiwan in March 1996 and the United States' response of 
sending two aircraft carrier groups to the waters east of Taiwan. This 
standoff led to a reexamination of positions by both China and the United 
States. After intense discussions between their top security officials, rela­
tions stabilized. President Jiang Zemin made a successful state visit to 
Washington in October 1997, and President Clinton made a return visit 
to Beijing in June 1998 when he was agreeably surprised to find Jiang 
ready to reciprocate their live TV press conference in Washington. When 
he arrived in Hong Kong on his way out, he said President Jiang Zemin 
was "a man of extraordinary intellect, very high energy, a lot of vigor. He 
has a quality that is profoundly important at this moment of our history: 
he has a good imagination. He has a vision, he can visualize a future that 
is different from the present." 
Yet within months, this warmth turned cold as the Cox Report of the 
Senate committee investigating the loss of nuclear missile secrets blamed 
it on Chinese espionage. Leaks of the Cox Report created such a hostile 
mood in Congress that President Clinton did not seize the offer to close a 
WTO deal with Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji in Washington in April 
1999. Within two weeks, in May, American bombs hit the Chinese 
embassy in Belgrade, a tragic error. Relations turned sour. This roller­
coaster relationship between the world's most powerful and the world's 
potentially next most powerful nation is unsettling to all in Asia. 
U.S.-China relations took a promising turn in November 1999 when 
they agreed on the terms for China's entry into the World Trade 
Organization. China's entry will greatly increase its economic links, based 
on a framework of set rules, with the United States and other member 
countries. This will lead to mutually beneficial relationships. 
From time to time, American administrations can be difficult to deal with, 
as during President Clinton's first term (1993- 1996). After the Michael Fay 
incident, Singapore suddenly became persona non grata because we were not 
following the American liberal prescription for how to become a democratic 
and developed country. But our relations warmed up again after the currency 
America's New Agenda 497 
crisis in July 1997. The United States found us a useful interlocutor. Singa­
pore was the only country in the region where the rule of law and sturdy 
banking regulations with rigorous supervision had enabled it to withstand a 
massive capital outflow from the area. At an APEC meeting in Vancouver in 
November 1997, President Clinton accepted Prime Minister Goh Chok 
Tang's proposal for a special meeting of the affected countries and G-7 mem­
bers to discuss the economic crisis and help them put their banking systems 
right and restore investor confidence. The first meeting of G22 finance min­
isters was held in Washington in April 1998. 
As the crisis worsened in Indonesia , there were close consultations 
between key U.S. Treasury and State Department officials and ours as we 
tried to halt the meltdown of the Indonesian rupiah. President Clinton 
phoned Prime Minister Goh before he sent out Deputy Treasury Secretary 
Larry Summers to see President Suharto in January 1998. In March 1998, 
Clinton sent former Vice President Mondale as his personal representative 
to explain the gravity of the situation to Suharto. Their efforts failed 
because Suharto never understood how vulnerable Indonesia had become 
after he opened up its capital account and allowed Indonesian companies 
to borrow some US$80 billion from foreign banks. 
In the middle of this financial crisis, Singapore further liberalized its 
financial sector. What we did was out of our own convictions, but it coin­
cided with the IMF and U.S. Treasury prescription on how to develop a 
financial free market. We were commended by the Americans as an exam­
ple of a free, unfettered economy. 
There will be ups and downs in Singapore's relationship with the 
United States because we cannot always follow their formula and act as 
their model for progress. Singapore is a densely populated, tiny island 
located in a turbulent region, and it cannot be governed like America. 
However, these are small differences compared to the value of U.S. pres­
ence in Asia, which has ensured security and stability and made economic 
growth possible. America accelerated this growth by opening up its mar­
kets to exports from noncommunist countries. If Japan had won the war, 
we would have been enslaved. If the United States had not entered World 
War II and the British had continued as the major power in Asia, Singa­
pore and the region would not have industrialized so easily. Britain did 
not allow its colonies to get ahead industriall y. 
498 From Third World to First 
When China entered the Korean War, threatening peace and stability 
in East Asia, the Americans fought North Korean and Chinese forces to a 
standstill at the 38th parallel. They helped to rebuild Japan with aid and 
investments, and made possible the industrialization of South Korea and 
Taiwan. The United States expended blood and treasure in Vietnam from 
1965 to 1975 and checked the spread of communism. American compa­
nies came to Southeast Asia to set up repair facilities to support the U.S. 
forces in Vietnam. Then they built manufacturing plants unrelated to the 
Vietnam War, and exported their products to America. This triggered off 
the industrialization of Southeast Asia, including Singapore. 
America's generosity of spirit grew out of an innate optimism that it 
could give and still have more to give. Unfortunately , this spirit weak­
ened in the late 1980s because of trade and budget deficits. To correct the 
deficits, America demanded that Japan and the other NIEs open up their 
markets, revalue their currencies upward, import more American prod­
ucts, and pay royalties for intellectual property. 
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Americans have become as 
dogmatic and evangelical as the communists were. They want to promote 
democracy and human rights everywhere, except where it would hurt 
themselves as in the oil-rich Arabian peninsula. Even so, the United 
States is still the most benign of all the great powers, certainly less heavy­
handed than any emerging great power. Hence, whatever the differences 
and frictions, all noncommunist countries in East Asia prefer America to 
be the dominant weight in the power balance of the region. 
My reservations in the 1960s about dealing directly with Americans were 
because they acted as if their wealth could solve all problems. Many of 
their officials then were brash and inexperienced, but I found them easier 
to work with than I expected. I did not need interpreters to understand 
them. They too could read me easily. Had I made my speeches only in 
Chinese or Malay, Bill Bundy, the assistant secretary of state for East Asia, 
would not have read them and initiated the relationshi p with successive 
administrations that began with my meeting with President Johnson in 
October 1967. I was fortunate in getting on with most of the U.S. presi­
dents and their principal aides, especially their secretaries of state. Several 
America's New Agenda 499 
have kept up our friendship even after they left office. Working together 
for shared objectives, we learned to trust each other and became good 
friends. 
America's political process, however, can be unnerving for its friends. 
Within 25 years, I have seen impeachment proceedings started against 
two American presidents-Nixon in 1974 and Clinton in 1998. Fortu­
nately, no great harm was done to the state of the union. Just as great a 
source of anxiety is the speed at which policies in Washington change 
with changes in the principal players. It makes for unpredictable relation­
ships. According to friendly diplomats in Washington, these new faces 
bring fresh ideas and act as a "flushing mechanism" to prevent the consol­
idation and fossilization of a ruling elite. I believe only a wealthy and 
solidly established nation like America can roll with such a system. 
Notwithstanding the openness of the American political process, no 
country knows how America will react to a crisis in its part of the world. 
Were I a Bosnian or a Kosovar, I would never have believed that Amer­
icans would involve themselves in the Balkans. But they did get involved, 
not to defend America's fundamental national interests, but to uphold 
human rights and put an end to crimes against humanity committed by a 
sovereign government against its own nationals. Is such a policy sustain­
able? And applicable worldwide? In Rwanda, Africa, it was not. Hence 
American friends keep reminding me that their foreign policy is often 
driven not by considerations of strategic national interest, but by their 
media. 
In spite of many mistakes and shortcomings, America has succeeded, 
and spectacularly so. In the 1970s and 1980s, its industries were going 
down in comparison to Japanese and German industries, but they came 
back with unexpected vigor in the 1990s. American corporations lead the 
world in the use of computers and information technology. They have 
exploited the digital revolution to restructure and flatten their organiza­
tions, and have increased productivity to previously unheard of levels 
while keeping inflation low, increasing profits, and staying ahead of the 
Europeans and Japanese in competitiveness. Their strength is in their tal­
ent, nurtured in their universities, think tanks, and in the R&D laborato­
ries of their MNCs. And they attract some of the brightest minds from 
the world over, including many from India and China, to new, high-
500 From Third World to First 
growth sectors like Silicon Valley. No European or Asian nation can 
attract and absorb foreign talent so effortlessly . This gives America a valu­
able advantage, like having a magnet to draw in the best and brightest 
from the world. 
It has taken some time for Europeans to acknowledge the superiority 
of the American free-market economy, especially its corporate philosophy 
of concentrating on rates of return on equity. American executives are 
driven by their ceaseless search for increased shareholder value through 
higher productivity and competitiveness. The cost of this high perfor­
mance-high reward system is an American society more divided than 
European or Japanese society. These two societies do not have the equiva­
lent of the American underclass. European corporate culture puts much 
importance on social unity and harmony. German companies have trade 
union representatives on their management boards. But they pay a price 
in lower rates of return on capital and poorer shareholder value. The 
Japanese have life-long employment and place high value on loyalty to 
and from their employees. The drawback is over-manning and loss of 
competitive edge. 
However, in the 1990s, many European companies have listed them­
selves on the New York Stock Exchange. This requires them to focus on 
quarterly returns and shareholder value. Acceptance of American stan­
dards of corporate governance is the accolade Europeans have paid to 
Americans. 
As long as its economy leads the world, and America stays ahead in 
innovation and technology, neither the European Union nor Japan nor China 
can displace the United States from its present preeminent position. 
31. Japan: Asia's First Miracle 
My impressions of the Japanese have undergone several changes over the 
last 60 years. Before World War II, I knew them as polite and courteous 
salesmen and dentists. They were a clean, neat, disciplined, and self­
contained community. I was thus completely unprepared for the cruelties 
they inflicted from February 1942 as conquerors of Singapore. They were 
unbelievably cruel. There were exceptions but systematic brutalization by 
their military government made them a callous lot. We suffered three and 
a half years of privation and horror. Millions died in Japanese-occupied 
territories in Southeast Asia. Prisoners of war, British, Dutch, Indian, and 
Australian alike, rotted away or were worked to death. 
Unexpectedly, on 15 August 1945, came the emperor's order to 
surrender. From being our lords and masters, the Japanese transformed 
themselves into model prisoners of war, conscientious and hardworking, 
cleaning up the city, applying themselves to their changed role seriously 
and diligently. Then they disappeared from the scene. I read of their dis­
tant hardships as they rebuilt Japan. 
In the 1960s, good-quality Japanese electrical goods flowed into 
Singapore. By the 1970s, the Japanese were up and running again. Their 
mastery of industrial production of textiles, petrochemicals, electronic 
goods, television sets, tape recorders, and cameras, plus modern manage­
ment and marketing methods, had made them a formidable industrial 
power. As they grew stronger, they bowed less low. 
502 From Third World to First 
For me and those of my generation, the deepest and strongest imprint 
the Japanese left on us was the horror of the occupation years. Those 
memories are indelible. I have since come to know many Japanese in a 
broader range of relationships-ministers, diplomats, businesspeople, 
editors, writers, and academics . Some became good friends. They are well­
educated, knowledgeable, and very human. I know the people much bet­
ter than I did in my youth. Because of fear and hate arising from the suf­
fering of the occupation years, I had felt the satisfaction of schadenfreude 
when I read of their hunger and suffering in their bombed and burnt 
cities. This feeling turned into reluctant respect and admiration as they 
stoically and methodically set out to rebuild from the ashes of defeat. 
Skillfully, they evaded most of the MacArthur military occupation policy 
objectives and preserved many key attributes that had made old Japan 
strong. A few were sent to the scaffold for their war crimes. The majority 
rehabilitated themselves and, as democrats, some won elections and 
became ministers. Others continued as patriotic, hardworking bureau­
crats dedicated to the rebuilding of Japan as a peaceful, nonmilitary 
nation-but one which neither repented nor apologized. 
My first postwar dealing with the Japanese was over a cold-blooded 
massacre committed when they captured Singapore in 1942. By chance, 
bones in a mass grave were discovered during earthworks in February 
1962 in Siglap, a suburb in the eastern end of the island. There were 
40 such sites. They revived all the memories of Sook Ching (a WWII site) 
some 20 years earlier when the Japanese Kempeitai (military police) rounded 
up and slaughtered 50,000 to 100,000 young Chinese men during the 
first fortnight after they captured Singapore. I had to be seen to raise 
the matter with the Japanese government and decided to see for myself 
this revitalized Japan. In May 1962, I made my first visit to Japan, then 
not completely recovered from the ravages of war. 
The Japanese foreign office put us up at the Imperial Hotel, a build­
ing designed by American architect Frank Lloyd Wright, later demol­
ished. It was a gracious, spacious, low-rise structure that looked Western 
yet was very Japanese. From my suite, I had glimpses of the old Tokyo, 
which I imagined must have been a charming city. The new bustling 
Tokyo showed clear signs of an economy revving up, but was higgledy-
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 503 
piggledy, rebuilt hastily from the ashes of the fire storms that had devas­
tated it when the American B-29s carpet-bombed it with incendiaries. 
The Japanese paid a heavy price for its urgent and haphazard reconstruc­
tion. The road system was bad and streets were narrow, not laid out on a 
grid and already jammed with traffic which would get worse as cars pro­
liferated. For a people with such a superb sense of the aesthetic, they had 
rebuilt an unattractive city, and thrown away the opportunity to rebuild 
an efficient, elegant capital, as was well within their capabilities. 
The national passion for golf, the prestige game, was very much in 
evidence. Foreign Minister Kosaka took me to play at his "300 Club," one 
of the most expensive in Japan, with only 300 members from their politi­
cal and business elite. The top executives had expensive imported 
American golf clubs and golf balls. The clubs made in Japan were inferior, 
with shafts that had no whip or feel. I thought that that was the limit of 
their technology and their ability to imitate. Twenty years later, Japanese 
golf clubs were some of the best and most expensive in the world. 
The only important business I raised with Prime Minister Hayato 
Ikeda was the "blood debt," a request for compensation for their wartime 
atrocities. He expressed his "sincere regrets"-not apology-for what had 
happened. He said the Japanese people would like to make amends for the 
"wrong done to the spirits of the departed"; he hoped these events would 
not prevent the growth of friendly relations between the people of Japan 
and Singapore. The question of compensation was left open. They wanted 
to avoid making a precedent that would lead to a deluge of claims from 
other victims elsewhere. He and his officials were most polite and were 
anxious to resolve the issue before it stirred up past bitterness. We even­
tually settled this "blood debt" after independence, in October 1966, for 
$50 million, half in grants and half in loans. I wanted to establish good 
relations to encourage their industrialists to invest in Singapore. 
Although my next visit to Tokyo in April 1967 was unofficial, Prime 
Minister Eisaku Sato saw me. He knew I had not been keen to press for 
compensation and thanked me for having resolved the "bones" issue. He 
accepted my invitation to visit Singapore and came in September that 
year, accompanied by his wife. He was the first Japanese prime minister 
to visit Singapore after the war. 
504 From Third World to First 
Sato was dignified and serious-looking until he broke into a friendly 
smile. When he laughed it was with a hearty guffaw. Sato looked like a 
samurai warrior. He was medium in height, broad-built, and sturdy and 
strong both in the expression of his face and in his posture. Choo once 
asked him over lunch if it was true that he was descended from samurais. 
He proudly answered yes, adding, so was his wife. He spoke in a deep 
voice and did not waste words. For every three sentences by his foreign 
minister, Takeo Miki, he uttered one, the more telling one. He held a 
place of honor among his country's postwar leaders as the first Japanese 
leader to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. 
We were comfortable with each ocher. After our meeting in Tokyo, he 
knew that I was not anti-Japanese, that I wanted to cooperate with Japan 
to industrialize Singapore. The only reference he made in his speech to the 
Japanese occupation was "There were times in the history of Asia when 
we had a number of unhappy incidents, " a monumental understatement. 
I paid a return official visit a year later, in October 1968. Japanese 
protocol was extremely particular , insisting chat I wear a black homburg, 
grey gloves, and a dark suit for the welcome and send-off ceremonies at 
the airport. They were sticklers for formal Western dress forms. 
Japanese officials and ministers, including the prime minister, 
expected me to solicit aid, as the British withdrawal from Singapore was 
then in the news. They knew the magnitude and urgency of our prob­
lems, and were much surprised chat I did not seek aid as ocher visiting 
leaders from developing countries had done. From discussions with Sato 
and Miki, I concluded chat they viewed Singapore, with its efficient port 
facilities and ocher infrastructure, as a useful starting point for their eco­
nomic activities in Southeast Asia. For chis role, they needed Singapore to 
have good relations with Indonesia and Malaysia. 
Sato also formally thanked me for the recent successful visit to 
Singapore of Crown Prince Akihito and Princess Michiko. I had enter­
tained chem to dinner and taken chem to the roof of the Iscana to see the 
Southern Cross, a constellation they could not see from Japan. As both 
were fluent in English, the conversat ion flowed easily. Choo and I were 
lacer to enjoy their gracious hospitality on several of our visits to Tokyo. 
Because it was an official visit, the emperor and empress of Japan gave 
us lunch at the Imperial Palace. The main palace had been bombed, so 
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 505 
they received us in one of the outer buildings. We were brought into a 
drawing room, beautifully carpeted and simply but elegantly furnished 
with a few pieces of furniture-chairs and tables, including some exquis­
ite small tables on which gifts were placed. Coming face to face with this 
demigod was a memorable moment in my life. For three and a half years 
in Japanese-occupied Singapore, he was god. Working for them as a cable 
editor in 1943-1 944 in Singapore's Cathay Building, many times I had 
had to bow deeply toward the Imperial Palace in Tokyo in homage. Here 
before Choo and me was this small man with a spare stooped frame. He 
looked utterly harmless. Indeed, he was friendly and courteous, speaking 
in a very low whisper. The empress was larger-built, soft and gentle­
looking with a pleasant round face. We were ushered by protocol officers 
into position for a ceremonial photo-taking. Then we sat down for a con­
versation, inconsequential except that at the appropriate moment he 
expressed his regrets for any suffering caused to the people of Singapore 
during the war. I nodded but did not say anything. I was not prepared for 
it, and thought it best to stay silent. 
That old reverence of the Japanese for their emperor will be difficult 
to re-create now that they have stripped the royal household of its myth of 
divinity. There remains no mystery about what the throne represents. To 
sit and make small talk in subdued tones across the luncheon table with 
this former god-king was an anticlimax. I wondered what Sato, who sat 
close to him at lunch, thought about his emperor, for he belonged to the 
generation that had revered him as a god. 
Choo and I were to call on the emperor and empress on several other 
occasions. One of my last acts as prime minister was to attend his funeral 
in February 1989. Dignitaries from all over the world came to Tokyo to 
pay tribute to the head of a resurrected industrial power. It was a solemn 
traditional ceremony . In Shinjuku Imperial Garden was this magnificent 
wooden Shinto shrine specially made for this funeral from beautiful white 
pine without using a single nail. Everybody was in a dark suit with over­
coat, muffler, and gloves, or in traditional dress. We were under an open 
tent, seated facing this shrine, shrivelled by a wind blowing out from 
Siberia. It was two and a half hours of biting, bitter cold. The Japanese 
arrangements were meticulous. There was an adjoining enclosed reception 
area which was warm and accessible, with hot refreshments, snacks, and 
506 From Third World to First 
restrooms with heated seats. Every guest present was provided with warm 
rugs and special packets, large and small, which acted as heat pads when 
the plastic wrapping was torn off and oxygen started the chemical process. 
I put the small pads in my shoes under my instep, and large ones in each 
pocket of my jacket, trousers, and overcoat. Poor Choo had no pockets 
whatsoever in her Chinese dress. I saw my neighbor put several heat pads 
on his seat to keep his bottom warm. It was a more severe test than bowing 
to him from the rooftop of the Cathay Building in Singapore. I could not 
have imagined then that I would represent Singapore to pay my respects to 
the Japanese emperor at his funeral, together with U.S. President George 
Bush and Britain's Prince Philip, representing the two big powers his forces 
had attacked without warning on 7 December 1941. All the major coun­
tries and many of the aid recipient countries were represented by their 
president or prime minister, and in some cases also by their monarch. The 
world came to pay tribute to Japan's outstanding success. 
Over the last 35 years, I have come to know Japan and its leaders better. 
We needed them to help us industrialize. They in turn saw Singapore as a 
strategic location in Southeast Asia from which they could expand their 
economic activities into the region. We also straddled the sea route from 
the Gulf states to Japan, critical for their oil tankers. Issues that regularly 
arose in my discussions with Japanese prime ministers were free passage 
through the Straits of Malacca, Japanese investment in Singapore and 
Southeast Asia, the security of the region including China's role in it, and 
economic cooperation in the Asia Pacific region. 
The right of free passage through the Straits of Malacca was upper­
most in the minds of almost all the Japanese leaders I met in the 1960s 
and 1970s. Sato had first expressed his concern in 1967 that big tankers 
might not be able to pass the Straits of Malacca because of its shallowness 
in certain parts. I said there would be no danger if those parts could be 
properly demarcated with lighted buoys or lighthouses. With advanced 
technology, the straits could be deepened and lighted buoys could mark 
out the lanes. He was encouraged by my positive approach. He was preoc­
cupied with their sea access to raw materials, especially oil, and to their 
markets. These issues had led them into World War II. Then they had the 
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 507 
military capability to strike out. After the war they did not. The next 
prime minister, Kakuei Tanaka, also raised this issue in May 197 3 when I 
went to Tokyo. When I told him that we could work together to resist 
any proposal by other countries in the region to collect tolls from ships 
passing through the straits, he was visibly reassured. 
Two years later, when I called on Prime Minister Takeo Miki, he 
expressed his sincere appreciation for our help in two accidents in the Straits 
of Singapore involving Japanese oil tankers, which had caused a furore with 
our neighbors. In January that year, the Showa Maru had run aground at 
Buffalo Rock, a few kilometers from Singapore, causing an oil slick 20 kilo­
meters (approximately 12 miles) long. There were fears of considerable pol­
lution to the coastlines of Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore. Our port 
authority had immediately dispatched antipollution barges to contain and 
disperse the oil slick with detergents. Then in April, the Tosa Maru collided 
with another tanker off St.John's Island, even nearer to Singapore, and broke 
in two. Fortunately, it had off-loaded its cargo of oil and so caused no pollu­
tion. Nevertheless, the Indonesian and Malaysian governments publicly 
called for toll fees from ships to compensate for damage to the littoral states, 
and also for a limit on the tonnage of ships allowed to sail through the Straits 
of Malacca. It was so vital an issue for Japan that during that visit both Dep­
uty Prime Minister Takeo Fukuda and Foreign Minister Kiichi Miyazawa 
separately thanked me for our help. 
The Japanese government, more than other major powers, rates the 
importance of a developing country according to its economic value to 
Japan. Singapore has no natural resources. It therefore rates us poorly. To 
get the Japanese to help us, for example, in investing in a petrochemical 
plant, we had to remind them that their ships passing through the Straits 
of Malacca would have problems with toll collectors if Singapore were to 
join the other littoral states, Indonesia and Malaysia. Japan's concern over 
the Straits of Malacca only abated after the UN Convention on the Law of 
the Sea (UNCLOS) in 1982 spelled out the right of free passage through 
international straits. 
During my years as prime minister, I encouraged Japanese investment in 
Singapore. When Prime Minister Sato visited Singapore in September 
508 From Third World to First 
1967, I said to him publicly that Singaporeans had no inhibitions over 
Japanese capital, technology, managers, or expertise, that Japan was set to 
lead the rest of Asia to greater industrialization. I told their industrialists 
in the Keidanren, their association for big industrialists, that we would 
welcome any industry with a wage or freight advantage in Singapore. A 
year later, our Economic Development Board (EDB) set up an office in 
Tokyo, but in the early 1970s the Japanese were not so ready to relocate 
their factories abroad. They were building up their industrial capacity in 
Japan itself. Only in the 1980s, when pressed by the Americans over their 
increasing trade surpluses, did they begin manufacturing in America. 
And when Europe shut out their products, they started to manufacture 
there, especially in Britain to export to the EEC. 
Typical of the careful and thorough manner in which Japanese compa­
nies invested abroad was the way Seiko decided to build its plant in 
Singapore. It took us more than three years in the early 1970s to persuade 
Seiko to build a watch factory in Singapore. Our EDB man in Tokyo, 
Wong Meng Quang, had been educated in a Japanese university and 
understood well their language and culture. Seiko did not believe that 
there was any place in Southeast Asia with the supporting industries and 
a sufficiently well-educated and trained workforce to meet their demands 
for precision engineering. Wong worked hard to convince them that to 
prepare for the day when cheaper quartz watches would make it uneco­
nomic to manufacture in Japan, they should consider Singapore. He culti­
vated the director in charge of technology and production. After several 
study missions, many feasibility reports, and innumerable assurances that 
we would give every assistance necessary, they finally decided to invest. I 
opened their factory in 1976. If they were thorough and careful before 
deciding to invest, after that decision they went all out to ensure its suc­
cess. They soon shed their doubts over the standards of our workers and 
upgraded into the manufacture of precision instruments, industrial robot­
ics, and automation systems. 
In 1969, we were interested in a petrochemical project. I first asked 
Miki for his government's support as we knew that unlike the Americans 
or Europeans, the government in Japan played an important role in these 
investments and its support was often decisive. In May 1975, I met 
Norishige Hasegawa, the president of Sumitomo Chemical Corporation. 
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 509 
He was willing co commit his company co such a project but said his gov­
ernment did not support it. He asked me to get Japan's prime minister to 
make a public commitment in support. Prime Minister Miki was reluc­
tant to do this because Indonesia, an oil producer, wanted a petrochemical 
project for themselves. I urged Miki not to allow Japan to be pressured by 
resource-rich countries to desist from making a sound investment. I 
reminded him of the help Singapore had rendered over the two leaking 
Japanese oil tankers and hoped he would support the Sumitomo project. 
He then issued a short statement that although it was a private invest­
ment project, the Japan government had a deep interest in it and was 
ready to promote it. 
It was another two years, in May 1977, before Miki's successor, 
Takeo Fukuda, endorsed the Singapore-Japan petrochemical project with 
Sumitomo as the leader of the project for the Japanese. Without him, the 
project might never have materialized. An investment of over US$1 bil­
lion was considered massive in 1977, and petrochemicals too capital­
intensive and high-tech for Singapore. Even so, it took the intervention 
of Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone when he visited Singapore in 1983 
to get it really going. Shortly afterward, the project proceeded on a 50:50 
basis. It had a slow start coming on-stream in a period of oversupply but 
it became profitable and spawned several major investments in down­
stream products. 
The Japanese prime ministers I met, from Ikeda in 1962 co Miyazawa in 
1990, were all men of considerable ability. One stood out as a rough dia­
mond- Kakuei Tanaka, whom I met in May 197 3 in Tokyo. He had a 
reputation as a bulldozer, a man with a powerful computer-like mind, a 
construction contractor who had fought his way up from the ranks. Of 
average height for a Japanese, broad and burly, he was a bundle of energy. 
A brusqueness and bluntness in his approach distinguished him from 
other Japanese prime ministers. They were mostly graduates of Tokyo 
Imperial University or some other renowned institution who became 
bureaucrats, and after rising co the top of their civil service had joined the 
leadership of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP). Tanaka never went to 
university but was more than equal co his job. 
510 From Third World to First 
It was refreshing to talk to a Japanese leader who was ready to express 
his views without inhibitions, even on sensitive subjects like anti­
Japanese sentiments in Southeast Asia. Japan was then in trouble with 
Thai students in Bangkok demonstrating against their economic exploi­
tation. I said it was not enough to send their trade and industry minister, 
Nakasone, to pat the Thais on their backs; if Tanaka did not want such 
problems to fester, he had to show the Thais, Indonesians, and Filipinos 
that the Japanese were interested beyond extracting their raw materials, 
for example by offering them industrialization. I was to repeat this argu­
ment with other Japanese prime ministers with not much effect. 
Within eight months, in January 1974, I received Tanaka in Singa­
pore. When he descended from his plane, his face was crooked with his 
lips and cheek puckered to one side. He was not self-conscious, explaining 
in a matter-of-fact way that he had a nerve problem which would take 
some time to clear up. He exuded enormous self-confidence. 
He resigned at the end of 1974 because of a bribery case against him 
over the purchase of Lockheed aircraft, but remained a powerful figure in 
the LOP, a king-maker, until he died in 1993. 
Takeo Fukuda was a slight, trim, wiry man with a puckish expression on a 
small, delicately formed face. I met him in May 1977 after he became 
prime minister. From previous meetings with him as a minister, I knew 
he had a sharp, capacious mind and wide-ranging interests. Once, tO show 
how disadvantaged Japan was, he took out a bulky pocketbook from his 
breast pocket to read out the size of Japan's Extended Economic Zone 
(EEZ) compared to America's. He had kept all useful facts and figures, 
including the number of square miles that each country had as its EEZ 
according to the Law of the Sea. 
In August, Fukuda visited Singapore after attending the Asean 
summit in Kuala Lumpur. We had one and a half hours of "belly talk" 
(Japanese for letting one's hair down). Our ministers agreed to set up a 
Japan-Singapore training center and to make contributions by Japanese 
firms to the center tax-deductible. The Japanese asked us to support a 
five-year transition period before the UKC (Under Keel Clearance or draft 
of a ship) at 3.5 meters (approximately 4 yards) was enforced for Japanese 
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 511 
tankers coming through the Straits of Malacca. Although Indonesia, 
Malaysia, and Singapore had agreed that it be implemented in three and a 
half years, I promised to try to extend it to five. We succeeded. 
Then I protested to Fukuda that his officials had spoken of Singapore 
not as a developing country but as an industrialized one not entitled to 
soft loans from Japan. If they treated us as already industrialized when 
we were not, the EEC and the United States would soon do the same. We 
would lose our General Scheme of Preferences (GSP) and other advantages 
before we could compete on equal terms. Fukuda took note and they 
ceased to raise this. Years later, in mid-1980, it was the European Com­
mission in Brussels that questioned Singapore' s status as a developing 
country. 
Fukuda remained a force in Japanese politics after he retired as a Diet 
member. His son won the seat he vacated, so deep and personal were the 
loyalties of Japanese voters. When he died in 1995, Japan lost a shrewd, 
experienced, and wise leader. He had a grasp of the problems of the world 
at the end of the twentieth century and understood Japan could not live 
in isolation. 
I made an official visit in October 1979 after Masayoshi Ohira suc­
ceeded Fukuda. Japanese protocol had moved with the times and no 
longer insisted on a black homburg and grey gloves. We were put up at 
the Asakasa (guest) Palace. We had lunch given by Emperor Hirohito and 
the empress, and a formal black-tie dinner with the prime minister. 
Ohira had a broad, smiling face and puffed cheeks and laughed easily. 
A Hitotsubashi University graduate working in the ministry of finance, 
he was a cautious, capable leader. I drew his attention to the demonstra­
tion effect on our neighbors of Singapore-Japan cooperation in projects 
like the Japan-Singapore training center, the computer software training 
center, the Japanese studies department of the University of Singapore, 
and the pairing of the University of Singapore's engineering faculty with 
its Japanese counterpart. These were carefully studied by our neighbors. 
Because Singapore had succeeded, they realized the value of training and 
knowledge and were more likely to cooperate with Singapore and Japan. 
He agreed to my request for help in human resource development, adding 
that this subject was close to his heart. When Ohira died suddenly a year 
later, I lost a friend. 
512 From Third World to First 
Zenko Suzuki, who succeeded Ohira, visited Singapore and the other 
Asean countries in January 1981. I urged him to give special attention to 
Asean the way Europe did to Africa at the Lome Convention. Suzuki 
emphatically agreed. He had decided to visit Asean first, although tra­
ditionally the first overseas call of a Japanese prime minister was on 
Washington. Only later would he go to Washington, and then to the G-7 
summit in Ottawa. Japan was a true member of Asia, he declared, and as 
its only highly industrialized country, had a special responsibility for and 
intended to work with Asia. 
His change in posture was significant. It was unthinkable for a 
Japanese prime minister to make such a major shift without the support 
of their all-powerful bureaucrats. To underline his emphasis on Asean, he 
recounted how the Soviet Union had approached Japan for help in 
Siberia's economic development. Unless the Soviets changed their policies 
in Afghanistan and Vietnam, Japan would not give economic assistance 
for Siberia, although the Soviets had asked Japan to separate economics 
from politics. I encouraged him in this firm stand; if Japan, Europe, and 
America helped the Soviets to cover up the failures of their system, they 
would continue to create trouble for the world. Without outside help, in 
15 to 20 years they would face problems more severe than Poland's. 
Suzuki agreed. 
A graduate of the Fisheries Training Institute (now Tokyo University 
of Fisheries), he was an expert on the subject. I had an enjoyable dinner 
with him discovering the mysteries of fisheries and the fishing industry of 
Japan. Many of the metaphors he used were fish-related. When I proposed 
that Japan should concentrate on human resource development, training 
Southeast Asians to be skilled and productive workers like the Japanese, 
he agreed, saying, "If you give a man a fish, he has but one meal; if you 
teach him how to fish ... " He would set aside a hundred million dollars 
for a training center in each Asean country, and one in Okinawa. The key 
to a modern economy, he said, was through training, not grants and soft 
loans. 
Because most Japanese prime ministers after Sato did not remain in 
office more than two years, it was difficult to establish deep personal rela­
tions with them. Changes of prime minister and ministers made little dif­
ference, for Japan continued to achieve high growth rates. Foreign com-
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 513 
mencators attributed this to the power and competence of the bureau­
cracy. I believe they underestimated the competence of the men who took 
turns to become prime minister and cabinet ministers. They were drawn 
from the same pool of leading members of the LDP factions, all of them 
able, experienced, and sharing a common outlook. 
Yasuhiro Nakasone, Suzuki's successor, was able to stay as prime min­
ister for five years from 1982. He could speak English but with a strong 
Japanese accent. He spoke in a resounding voice with emphasis and vigor. 
He had been a lieutenant (paymaster) in the Japanese Imperial Navy and 
was proud of it. Tall and strapping for a Japanese at five-foot- eleven, with 
a high dome of a balding forehead, he exuded energy and self-discipline. 
He meditated for two hours at a temple once a week, sitting with back 
straight and legs crossed in lotus position, and recommended I take it up. 
I took his advice and with the help of a friend, a Buddhist and a Western­
trained doctor, I learned to do it, but only for half an hour at a time. Later, 
I made it a daily routine. It has been more beneficial than tranquillizers. 
He had none of the self-effacing ways of most Japanese leaders. When 
I visited him in March 1983, he welcomed me, saying how happy he was 
to have realized his hope to greet me in the prime minister's office. He 
was concerned over Asean's reaction to what he termed "a slight increase 
in Japan's defence expenditure." When he was in charge of the Defence 
Agency he had made known his hawkish views, that Japan must be ready 
to defend itself. Now he had the excuse that the American senate had 
passed a resolution calling upon Japan to increase its defense expenditure. 
He wanted to assure apprehens ive neighbors that Japan was not becoming 
militaristic simply because it improved its self-defense forces so as to be 
able, in an emergency, to defend the three straits (Soya, Tsugaru, and 
Tsushima) around the Japanese islands. This, he claimed, had been the 
policy of previous cabinets, although it had not been publicly declared. 
When he visited Singapore in 1983, I recounted that 10 years previ­
ously, in that same cabinet room, General lchiji Sugita (retired), who as a 
lieutenant colonel had helped to plan General Tomoyuki Yamashita's 
invasion of Malaya, had apologized to me for his role. He had returned in 
1974 and 1975 together with his surviving officer colleagues to brief 
Singapore Armed Forces officers on their experiences during the cam­
paign in Malaya and their final assault on and capture of Singapore. Much 
514 From Third World to First 
had taken place in the lstana since General Yamashita stayed there after 
he captured it. We must not allow ourselves to be blinkered by the past 
but work toward a future free of suspicions. He expressed in English his 
"heartfelt gratitude" for my position. 
The deep-seated fears of the Japanese people of getting embroiled in 
another unwinnable and punishing war slowed down Nakasone's strong 
defense policies. Opinion polls showed the people favored a low posture 
on defense. Because of his forthright nature, we talked freely when we 
met over lunches and dinners in Tokyo long after he was no longer prime 
minister. 
The grip of the LDP on power started to slip from the late 1980s. The 
system that had worked well for 35 years could no longer cope with the 
changed domestic and international circumstances. The LDP came under 
increasing attack for corruption, with the media reporting one scandal 
after another. The Japanese media had decided to break up the cozy part­
nership between LDP politicians, big businessmen, especially construc­
tion contractors, and top bureaucrats. 
Noboru Takeshita, who succeeded Nakasone as prime minister in 
1987, was a dapper little man who had graduated from Waseda University, 
not Todai. He was always soft-spoken and formal in his social interaction. 
His often smiling face belied the shrewd political infighter he was. He had 
a cautious leadership style compared to Nakasone's, but could deliver on 
his promises. 
Takeshita was prime minister at a time of excitement and hope 
among the Japanese of getting the Kurile islands back from the Soviets. 
Gorbachev needed international financial assistance. The Japanese were 
prepared to be generous, provided they got back their four islands or at 
least a firm undertaking to return them. In Tokyo, at the funeral of 
Emperor Hirohito in February 1989, Takeshita told me that the Soviet 
Union had not relented in its occupation of the islands. Later, he sent me a 
message asking me to put in a word of support for the return of the islands 
when Soviet Prime Minister Ryzhkov visited Singapore in early 1990. I 
once asked Prime Minister Takeo Miki why the Soviets, who had so much 
of the world's territory in Euro-Asia, would want four islands off the 
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 515 
Kamchatka Peninsula. Miki's face darkened when he said with deep anger 
and passion that the Russians were greedy for territory. What had hap­
pened to the Japanese inhabitants of the Kurile islands? He replied with 
disgust, "Every single Japanese was removed and sent back to Japan." 
Takeshita shared this passionate desire to get back the four islands. When 
Ryzhkov visited Singapore, I raised the subject of the four islands. His 
response was totally predictab le: There was no dispute over the four 
islands; they were Soviet. 
During Takeshita's two-year term of office, a scandal connected with 
an employment company called Recruit blew up. His right-hand man 
was alleged to have received funds for political purposes and committed 
suicide, to the great sorrow of Takeshita who resigned as prime minister. 
After a series of scandals, the public demanded a clean figure as prime 
minister. Although he led one of the smallest LDP factions, Toshiki Kaifu 
became prime minister in 1989. He was a pleasant, gregarious man 
known as "Mr. Clean." While not as scholarly as Miyazawa, or decisive 
like Nakasone, or an infighter like Takeshita, he had the common touch. 
During his full two-year term, he faced problems which Nakasone 
would have been happy to deal with in his decisive manner. The Ameri­
cans wanted Japan to send troops to the Gulf for action against Iraq. 
Kaifu consulted all faction leaders and ended up not sending any, instead 
paying US$13 billion as Japan's contribution to this operation. 
The West had recognized Japan's economic power and, beginning 
from 1975 with Rambouillet, had invited its leaders to the G-5 summits. 
But Japan faced obstacles in its search for a role as a major economic power, 
the most serious being the attitude of Japanese leaders to their war-time 
atrocities. They compare badly to the West Germans who openly admitted 
and apologized for their war crimes, paid compensation to victims, and 
taught younger Germans their history of war crimes so they would avoid 
making the same mistakes. In contrast, Japanese leaders are still equivocal 
and evasive. Perhaps they do not want to demoralize their people or insult 
their ancestors and their emperor. Whatever the reason, successive LDP 
prime ministers have not faced up to their past. 
Kaifu made the first break with the past in a memorable speech in 
Singapore in May 1990. He expressed "sincere contrition at past Japanese 
actions, which inflicted unbearable suffering and sorrow upon a great 
516 From Third World to First 
many people in the Asia Pacific region .... The Japanese people are 
firmly resolved never again to repeat those actions, which had tragic con­
sequences .... " It was just short of an apology. He spoke with candor and 
realism. 
I highlighted to Kaifu the difference between the German and 
Japanese attitudes to their war records. When German industrialists and 
bankers gave me their CVs, they would invariably list their experiences 
during the war-fighting in campaigns in Stalingrad or Belgium, where 
they had been captured as POWs by the Soviets or Americans or British, 
the rank they attained, and the medals won. But Japanese CVs left the 
years 19 3 7 to 194 5 blank, as if chose were non years. le was a signal chat 
they did not wish co talk about chem. Not surprisingly, a curtain fell 
between the Japanese and people they dealt with, building suspicion and 
distrust. I suggested that the Japanese study the German way of educat­
ing the next generation on their history, so as not to repeat the same mis­
takes. Kaifu said he was encouraged by my comments and stressed chat 
Japan was changing. He was the first postwar prime minister, he said, 
who did not have a military background. In 1945, he was still a young 
student; in the 1960s, he had participated in the democratization process. 
He would look into the task of educating the young about the facts of 
World War II and would revise their school textbooks. He did not stay 
long enough in office co follow through before he was replaced by Kiichi 
Miyazawa. 
Short and sprightly, with an inquiring expression on his round face, 
Miyazawa's broad brow would wrinkle when he pondered over a question. 
He would purse his lips before he delivered a cautious and carefully 
thought-out position. He struck me as more of a scholar than a politician , 
and could easily have stayed on as a professor in Todai, where he gradu­
ated, had he chosen a career in academia. Instead he became a finance 
ministry bureaucrat. 
The media had quoted me in 1991: Letting the Japanese rearm for 
UN peacekeeping operations in Cambodia was like "giving liqueur 
chocolates to an alcoholic. " At a lunch with other LOP leaders in Tokyo 
shortly before he took over as prime minister, Miyazawa asked me what I 
had meant. I replied that it was difficult to change Japanese culture. The 
Japanese have a deeply ingrained habit of wanting co achieve perfection 
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 517 
and going co the limits in whatever they do, whether in flower arrange­
ment, sword-making, or war. I did not believe Japan could repeat what it 
had done between 1931 and 1945 because China now had the nuclear 
bomb. But if Japan wanted to play its part as a permanent member of the 
UN Security Council, its neighbors must feel it was trustworthy and 
dependable as a force for peace. Miyazawa asked whether Kaifu's expres­
sion of "contrition" was not in itself a catharsis. I said it was a good start 
but not an apology. As prime minister, Miyazawa's first statement in the 
Diet in January 1992 expressed his "heartfelt remorse and regrets" at the 
unbearable suffering and sorrow the people of the Asia Pacific region had 
endured. Unlike Nakasone, who was a hawk, Miyazawa was a dove. He 
had always supported the U.S.-Japan alliance and was against any rearm­
ing. His English was fluent with a wide vocabulary, making a frank 
exchange of views easy. He was quick to take up and counter any point he 
did not accept-but ever so politely. We had been good friends for many 
years before he became prime minister. 
Miyazawa was concerned about the kind of China that would result 
from its high growth rates. Like Sato in 1968, Miki (1975), and Fukuda 
(1977), Miyazawa discussed China at length. Even when China was closed 
to the world with its economy stagnant, Japanese leaders paid it careful 
attention. After Deng Xiaoping's open-door policy, the Japanese were 
increasingly focused on a neighbor that was growing at 8 to 10 percent 
yearly and could challenge Japan's preeminence in East Asia. Miyazawa's 
concern was that a strong China, without the checks and balances of a 
democratic system and a free press, would affect the security of Japan and 
East Asia. Most Japanese leaders believed that their arrangements with the 
United States would ensure security for 20 years. It was the long-term 
future that troubled Miyazawa and all Japanese leaders. Their unspoken 
fear was that one day the Americans would be unable to maintain their 
dominant military presence and would be unwilling to defend Japan. They 
were uncertain whether China would be a force for stability or tension. 
I argued that it was best to draw the Chinese out to become a part of 
the modern world. Japan should get bright Chinese students to study in 
Japan and develop close relationships with young Japanese. The exposure 
of China's best and brightest to the United States, Japan, and Europe 
would make them less inward-looking and would get them to understand 
518 From Third World to First 
that if China wanted to grow and prosper, it had to be a law-abiding 
member of the international community. If the Chinese were isolated and 
thwarted in their efforts at economic reform and progress, they would 
become hostile to the advanced countries. 
Most Japanese leaders believed that in a crunch, Asean countries 
would line up with Japan, but were unsure how Singapore would react. 
They accepted that despite being ethnic Chinese my views and policies 
toward China were chose of a Singaporean whose interests were in 
Southeast Asia, and chat I would not necessarily support China in any 
conflict. However, they were uncertain how Singapore's majority Chinese 
population and its future leaders would react under Chinese pressure. I do 
not chink I succeeded in dispelling their doubts. 
During Miyazawa 's term as prime minister a powerful faction led by 
a young Tanaka protege, Ichiro Ozawa, brought the government down in 
a critical vote. Unlike other LOP faction leaders, Miyazawa was not a 
cough, ruthless infighter. In the election chat followed, the LOP lose 
power. One outcome of this break in the LDP hold on government was 
that Morihiro Hosokawa became the first prime minister to admit in 
unambiguous language Japan's aggression in World War II and apologize 
for the sufferings caused. He did not have the LOP mindset, to hang 
cough over their war crimes. This unqualified apology came only after a 
nonmainscream party leader became prime minister. 
The following year, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama of the Social 
Democratic Party of Japan also apologized, and did so to each Asean 
leader in turn during his visits co Asean countries. He said publicly in 
Singapore that Japan needed to face up squarely to its past actions of 
aggression and colonialism. On the 50th anniversary of the end of the war 
(1995 ), he expressed once again his feelings of deep remorse and his heart­
felt apology. Japan, he said, would have to reflect on the sufferings it had 
inflicted on Asia. He was the first Japanese prime minister to lay a wreath 
at Singapore 's civilian war memorial. We had not asked him co do so. He 
said he did it to maintain future peace and stability in the region. He was 
aware of latent anti-Japanese sentiments around the region and saw the 
need to deepen political, economic, and cultural exchanges. The apologies 
of two non-LOP prime ministers, Hosokawa and Murayama, irrevocably 
dented the hard-line no-apology stance of previous Japanese governments. 
Japan: Asia's First Miracle 519 
Although the LDP as such did not apologize, it was part of the Murayama 
coalition government that did. 
When Ryutaro Hashimoto of the LDP became prime minister in 
1996, he visited the Yasukuni Shrine in July that year, on his birthday, in 
a personal, not official, capacity. He paid his respects to the spirits of the 
war dead, including General Hideki Tojo, the wartime prime minister, 
and several other war criminals who had been hanged for war crimes This 
ambivalence in attitudes leaves a big question unanswered. Unlike the 
Germans, the Japanese have not had a catharsis and rid themselves of 
the poison in their system. They have not educated their young about the 
wrong they had done. Hashimoto expressed his "deepest regrets" on the 
52nd anniversary of the end of World War II (1997) and his "profound 
remorse" during his visit to Beijing in September 1997. However, he did 
not apologize, as the Chinese and Koreans wished Japan's leader to do. 
I do not understand why the Japanese are so unwilling to admit the 
past, apologize for it, and move on. For some reason, they do not want to 
apologize. To apologize is to admit having done a wrong. To express 
regrets or remorse merely expresses their present subjective feelings. They 
denied the massacre of Nanjing took place; that Korean, Filipino, Dutch, 
and other women were kidnapped or otherwise forced to be "comfort 
women" (a euphemism for sex slaves) for Japanese soldiers at the war 
fronts; that they carried out cruel biological experiments on live Chinese, 
Korean, Mongolian, Russian, and other prisoners in Manchuria. In each 
case, only after irrefutable evidence was produced from their own records 
did they make reluctant admissions. This fed suspicions of Japan's future 
intentions. 
Present Japanese attitudes are an indication of their future conduct. If 
they are ashamed of their past, they are less likely to repeat it. General 
Tojo, who was executed by the Allies for war crimes, said in his last will 
and testament that the Japanese were defeated only because superior 
forces overwhelmed them. For a country of its size and population, Japan 
can become a very considerable power in high-tech warfare. True, it will 
suffer severe disadvantages if a conflict between Japan and China escalates 
beyond conventional weapons. This is unlikely, but if it does happen, 
Japan's capabilities should not be underestimated. If the Japanese feel 
threatened, deprived of their means of livelihood as a nation by being cut 
520 From Third World to First 
off from oil or other critical resources , or shut out from their export mar­
kets, I believe they will again fight ferociously as they did from 1942 to 
1945. 
Whatever the future may hold for Japan and Asia, to play their role as 
an economic modernizer and UN peacekeeper, the Japanese must first put 
this apology issue to rest. Asia and Japan must move on. We need greater 
trust and confidence in each other. 
32. Lessons from Japan 
After World War II, a few men at the top of Japanese society were deter­
mined to rebuild Japan and its industrial sinews. This elite had not been 
disbanded by General MacArthur's occupying forces. When communist 
China intervened in the Korean War, the Americans switched their pol­
icy to one of rebuilding Japan. Japanese leaders realized this was their 
chance and kept a low, humble posture while they caught up with 
Americans, first in textiles, steel, ships, motorcars, and petrochemicals, 
then electrical and electronic goods, cameras, and finally computers. They 
had an elitist system. Like the French with their Grandes Ecoles, their 
former imperial universities as well as the top private ones selected the 
best and honed their talent. That talent found its way to the top of the 
bureaucracy and their corporations. Their elite, both administrators and 
corporate leaders, are equal to any in the world. However, the Japanese 
miracle was not the work of just a few at the top. The Japanese people as 
a whole shared a determination to prove that they were able to make the 
grade. At every level they strove to excel. 
I saw an unforgettable example of how they took pride in their work 
during a visit in the late 1970s to Takamatsu, a city on the island of Shi­
koku. The Japanese ambassador gave me dinner at their best, albeit three­
star, hotel. The food was excellent. For fruit and dessert, a chef in his thir­
ties appeared in immaculate white to demonstrate his skill with a sharp 
knife, peeling persimmons and crunchy pears. It was a virtuoso perfor­
mance. I asked about his training. He had started as a kitchen helper, 
522 From Third World to First 
cleaning plates, peeling potatoes, and chopping vegetables. Five years 
later he graduated as a junior cook; ten years later he became a chief chef 
in this hotel and was proud of it. Pride in their job and the desire to excel 
in their given roles, whether as cook, waiter, or chambermaid, makes for 
high productivity, and in manufacturing , near-zero defect products. No 
nation in Asia can match them, not the Chinese, Koreans, Vietnamese, or 
Southeast Asians. They consider themselves a special people. You are 
either born a Japanese and therefore in that magic circle, or you are not. 
This myth of being special makes them a formidable force as a nation, a 
corporation, or a team in any workplace. 
Indeed, the Japanese have admirable qualities. Theirs is a unique cul­
ture, where they fit into each other snugly like Lego bricks. One-to-one, 
many Chinese can match the Japanese, whether it is at Chinese chess or 
the game of Go. But in a group, especially a production team in a factory, 
they are difficult to beat. When I presented an award to Nobuo Hizaki, 
the managing director of Nichison company in the 1980s, I asked how 
Singapore workers compared to their counterparts in Japan because both 
worked identical machines. He assessed the Singaporeans' productivity at 
70 percent. The reasons: Japanese workers were more skilled and multi­
skilled, were more flexible and adaptable, and had less job-hopping and 
absenteeism. They accepted the need for life-long learning and training. 
All workers considered themselves grey-collar workers, not white-or 
blue-collar. Technicians, group leaders, and supervisors were willing to 
soil their hands. How long would it take for Singapore workers to catch 
up? He thought in 10 to 15 years. When pressed, Hizaki said Singapore 
workers would never catch up 100 percent. He gave two reasons. First, 
Japanese workers would cover for workmates who had to attend to other 
urgent business; Singapore workers looked only after their own jobs. 
Second, there was a clear division in Singapore between the rank and file 
and the officer cadre, which was the British system, where a polytechnic 
or university graduate came straight into the officer grade. This was not 
so in Japan. 
When I was in Japan in 1967, I visited the Yokohama shipyards of 
shipbuilders IHI (Ishikawajima-Harima Industries), our joint venture 
partner in Jurong Shipyard in Singapore. The vice president , Dr. Shinto, 
was a stout, energetic, able man and an outstanding engineer. Like 
Lessons from Japan 523 
the other workers, he wore his company's uniform. He wore rubber boots 
and a hard hat and provided me with the same before we toured the dock­
yard. He knew every inch of it and gave a running commentary in 
English. The Japanese workers were disciplined, hardworking, united, 
and efficient. 
Back in his office, over a working lunch, he explained the difference 
between British and Japanese managements. Japanese executives and 
engineers start work on the factory floor. They had to understand the low­
level workers before they could rise from the ranks to lead them effec­
tively. The British dockyard executive sat in his carpeted office and did 
not visit the workers on the shop floor or in the dockyards. That was bad 
for morale and productivit y. 
Later that year, I visited Swan Hunter's shipyards on the Tyneside. Sir 
John Hunter took me through his dockyard. The contrast was stark. Sir 
John wore a beautifully tailored suit with highly polished shoes. We 
drove up together in a Rolls Royce. When we walked through the greasy 
shop floor the muck stuck to our shoes. I had not noticed such grease at 
the IHI dockyards in Yokohama. As we were about to enter the Rolls, I 
hesitated. Sir John did not. He scraped the soles of his shoes against the 
floor and went into the car where he wiped the remaining grease on to the 
thick beige carpet. I was invited to do the same. I must have looked sur­
prised for he said, "They will shampoo it." We were driven off, not to an 
office working lunch but to the Gosforth Hotel, where we had an excel­
lent meal before playing 18 holes of golf. The British executive lived in 
style. 
May 1975 was my first visit to Japan after the oil crisis of October 1973. 
I had read of the comprehensive steps the Japanese had taken to save 
energy and their success in reducing oil consumption per unit of indus­
trial output. I found that all offices and public buildings, including their 
top hotels, had reduced power use. That summer, the temperature in my 
air-conditioned hotel room could not be brought below a minimum 25°C 
which was warm; there was a polite notice asking guests to be forbearing. 
The chambermaids assiduously switched off all lights and air conditioners 
every time we left our rooms. 
524 From Third World to First 
I asked our Public Utilities Board officials to study how the Japanese 
had been so successful in conserving energy. Their report showed how 
seriously they, unlike the Americans, had tackled the problem. Factories 
consuming more than a certain amount of electricity had appointed 
energy managers to rationalize energy use and report their progress to the 
Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) yearly. The construc­
tion industry took conservation measures to prevent heat loss through 
external walls and windows. Manufacturers improved the efficiency of 
domestic appliances like air conditioners, lighting, and water heaters and 
so lowered electricity consumption. They did the same for industrial 
machines and were required to display the power efficiency of each. 
The government gave tax incentives for installing energy-saving 
equipment, while banks financed the purchase and installation of heat 
insulation and other such equipment at special low rates of interest. They 
created an Energy Conservation Center in 1978 to spread information on 
conservation technology through exhibitions, factory energy audits, and 
research. No wonder Japan achieved the lowest electricity consumed per 
unit of industrial production. 
I asked our ministries to adopt similar measures wherever practical. 
We managed to cut down our use of electricity but nowhere as effectively 
as the Japanese. 
By the late 1970s, Japan was greatly admired for its recovery from the 
oil crisis. It enjoyed high rates of growth while Western Europe and 
America slowed down. Numerous articles and bestselling books extolled 
its virtues. But the Japanese could not erase the widely held stereotype 
that they worked like ants, lived in rabbit hutches, closed their markets, 
and exported an endless flow of steel, cars, and zero-defect television sets 
and electronic products. 
I learned from the Japanese the importance of increasing produc­
tivity through worker-mana ger cooperation, the real meaning of human 
resource development. We had formed a National Productivity Board 
(NPB) in 1972. We made progress, especially after Wong Kwei Cheong, 
a PAP MP and the managing director of a joint venture Japanese electron­
ics company, educated me on the virtues of Japanese-style management. 
He helped us form a National Productivity Council with members drawn 
from the private sector to advise the NPB. I approached the Japan Pro-
Lessons from Japan 525 
ductivity Center to help us set up a center and saw the chairman, Kohei 
Goshi, a dry old man of very few words in his mid-seventies. He was an 
ascetic who exuded sincerity and earnestness. He described productivity 
as a marathon with no finishing line. With his help over the next 10 
years, we built up an effective productivity organization that gradually 
got the unions and management working together on improving produc­
tivity. 
Japanese managers are totally dedicated to their jobs. In the 1970s, a 
Japanese engineer at Jurong Shipyard failed to secure an important oil 
storage tank project because of an error he had made in calculating costs. 
He felt deeply responsible for the drop in his company's profits that year 
and killed himself. We were shocked. We could not imagine any 
Singaporean feeling such a heavy sense of personal responsib ility. 
In every major city I visited in China and Vietnam, the major Japanese 
trading companies had stationed representatives to study what could be 
purchased and sold to other parts of the world, and what goods these places 
needed which Japan could bring in from elsewhere. They beavered away 
assiduously and kept Japanese companies well-informed. Singapore com­
panies, on the other hand, have trouble getting young executives to take 
hardship postings in developing countries like China and Vietnam. 
Because they demand so much of themselves, Japanese companies sel­
dom find Singapore managers as good as their own. In Jurong Shipyard, 
after 20 years of a joint venture operation started in the 1960s, the CEO, 
chief financial officer, and chief engineer were all Japanese. Nearly all 
American MNCs had appointed local CEOs within 10 years of starting 
operations. Singapore executives and engineers know that promotions and 
acceptance are most difficult in Japanese MNCs. 
High Japanese standards of responsibilit y, reliability , professionalism, 
and competence in the Japanese language made for hurdles difficult to 
cross. This is changing, but slowly. In the 1990s, one major Japanese 
MNC, NEC (Nippon Electric Company), appointed a Singaporean as its 
CEO. By then, more than 80 percent of the American companies and 50 
percent of European companies operating in Singapore had done so. Their 
different culture has created problems for Japanese companies overseas. 
526 From Third World to First 
They do not absorb non-Japanese easily into their corporate system. In a 
global economy, the Japanese will be at a disadvantage unless they can 
change and become more like the Americans and Europeans and absorb 
foreigners into their corporate cultures. 
After living in Japan for decades, Chinese Singaporean bankers and 
businesspeople rarely develop deep friendships with their Japanese associ­
ates, in spite of speaking fluent Japanese and conforming to Japanese 
social norms. They meet over dinner and at social gatherings in public 
places, almost never in their homes. 
The Japanese do not give business to foreign banks. Singapore banks 
in Japan depend entirely on Singaporeans and other foreigners. When big 
Japanese firms invest in Singapore, they bring their supporting compa­
nies to cater to their needs, including Japanese supermarkets, restaurants, 
and other suppliers of their way of life. 
Because they were cut off from Western technology and had a dif­
ficult time reaching the cop, dependin g much on reverse engineering, 
the Japanese are miserly in passing on their technology, as Taiwanese, 
Koreans, and Southeast Asians have found. Having earned their newly 
found wealth the hard way, they are loath to part with it to spendthrift 
Third World regimes, to benefit, not the people, but a few leaders. It is a 
minor miracle that under American suasion, they have become the world's 
largest aid donor. Singaporeans have also come up the hard way, so I 
understand Japanese sentiments. We have always preferred to give aid in 
the form of training and technical assistance, not in grants which could be 
misused. 
In 1980, officials from our ministry for trade and industry visited their 
counterparts in Japan's formidable Ministry for International Trade and 
Industry (MITI) which had charted the course for Japan's postwar indus­
trial progress. Their report was illuminating. The Japanese were focused 
on the future. They were not harking back to an idyllic Japan of sailing 
ships and samurais. Their agenda was energy conservation, alternatives to 
oil, and a strategy to overcome protectionism in steel, cars, and electronic 
products by moving to creative knowledge industries. So far their prog­
ress had been a catching-up process. Now they had to move forward on 
Lessons from Japan 527 
their own by creating new technology and new products. MITI's vision 
for the 1980s was of a technology-based Japan that embarked on the con­
tinuous acquisition and exploitation of new knowledge to serve the needs 
of people and societies. 
MITI's advice to our officials in 1980 was, given Singapore's geo­
graphic position and environment, to prepare for a possible role as a cen­
ter for knowledge and information, to complement Tokyo. The Japanese 
believed that for such a center to succeed, the people had to be reliable 
and trustwort hy. We took their advice to heart. After a careful study of 
what it took to be such a knowledge and information center, we redou­
bled our emphasis on the teaching of the sciences, mathematics, and 
computers in all our schools. We computerized the whole government 
administration to set the pace for the private sector. We gave income tax 
incentives by allowing rapid depreciation for computers. That decision 
has given us a lead over our neighbors. It seeded our plans for an "intelli­
gent island," completely linked up with fiberoptics and directly con­
nected with all the main centers of knowledge and information-in 
Tokyo, New York, London, Paris, and Frankfurt, and also our neighbors, 
Kuala Lumpur, Jakarta, Bangkok, and Manila. 
At my meetings with the Japanese Chamber of Commerce in Singa­
pore, I learned how they continuously rejuvenate their enterprises with 
fresh investments. In order to compete worldwide, they set out to acquire 
the most advanced technology for their industries. What impressed me 
most was their emphasis on investing in the people who work these 
machines and manage the company. To make the best use of state-of-the­
art machines, they have continual training and retraining of their staff. 
This philosophy ensured that they would always be out in the forefront. 
MITI officials explained to me that the fundamental strength of 
any enterprise lay in its people. Hence, they invested in their workers 
who had life-long employment. We Singaporeans were immigrants. Our 
workers were accustomed to the British system where workers moved to 
the employer who paid best. 
Also uniquely Japanese was their way of paying workers fringe benefits 
in allowances, overtime, bonuses, and company welfare. These amounted to 
more than the basic wage, unlike the practice in Singapore. Because supple­
mentary benefits were high, a company faced with a recession could imme-
528 From Third World to First 
diately trim bonuses and allowances to save as much as 40 to 50 percent of 
their wage bill, and restore them later when company profits recovered. 
This made life-long employment possible. Management and workers 
shared the profits, and also shared the hardships in lean years when the 
company did not make profits. Workers were conscious that the com­
pany's long-term well-being was crucial for their life-long employment. 
Their companies provided medical and dental care, housing, including 
hostels for bachelors and housing loans at highly subsidized rates, family 
recreational facilities, education for employees' children, farewell and wel­
coming parties, long-service gifts, stock options, and congratulatory and 
condolence allowances. The ties that bound them to their company were 
many and strong. Of course, only the big companies and the public sector 
could afford this life-long employment system. They were able to pass on 
the burden of retrenchments in a downturn to their suppliers, the smaller 
companies. I wanted to emulate them but gave up after discussions with 
Singapore employers. We did not have their culture of strong worker loy­
alty to their companies. Moreover, many of our big employers were 
American and European MNCs with different company cultures. 
I have tried to identify those Japanese strong points which we could adopt 
because they were system-or method-based. In the 50 years since I first 
knew them as military overlords , I have had many meetings with Japanese 
engineers , CEOs, ministers , and formidable bureaucrats. I have come to 
believe reports of some Western psychologists that their average IQ, espe­
cially in mathematics, is higher than that of Americans and Europeans. 
In spite of my experiences during the Japanese occupation and the 
Japanese traits I had learned to fear, I now respect and admire them. Their 
group solidarity, discipline, intelligence, industriousness , and willingness 
to sacrifice for their nation make them a formidable and productive force. 
Conscious of the poverty of their resources, they will continue to make 
that extra effort to achieve the unachievable. 
Because of their cultural values, they will be among the survivors after 
any catastrophe. From time to time they are hit by the unpredictable forces 
of nature--earthquakes, typhoons, and tsunamis. They take their casual-
Lessons from Japan 529 
ties, pick themselves up, and rebuild. The behavior of the people of Kobe 
after a massive earthquake in 1995 was exemplary and impressive. Riots 
and looting followed in Los Angeles in 1992 after a less devastating earth­
quake, whereas the Japanese in Kobe reacted stoically. There was no loot­
ing or rioting. Japanese companies mounted their own rescue effort to pro­
vide food, shelter, and clothing; voluntary organizations came forward to 
help without any prompting. Even the yakuza Oapanese mafia) pitched in. 
The government's rescue efforts were slow. Railways and roads were unus­
able, and telephones , water, and power were cut. But there was no wring­
ing of hands, however terrible their losses in family and property. 
I was amazed at how life was returning to normal when I visited Kobe 
in November 1996, one and a half years after the earthquake. They had 
taken this catastrophe in their stride and settled to a new daily routine. 
They are indeed different in culture. But they will have to change enough 
to fit into the world of many peoples with many different cultures. 
The Japanese paradigm of catching up with the West has run its course. It 
climaxed in the late 1980s when the Tokyo stock market capitalization 
was equal to that of the New York Stock Exchange and land values in 
Tokyo exceeded those of New York. However, when the Bank of Japan 
pricked the bubble in 1990, the economy went on a long slide downhill. 
Meanwhile, in the 1990s, the American economy transformed itself 
through downsizing and restructuring, and exploiting the digital revolu­
tion, especially the Internet. It has left both the Japanese and the European 
economies far behind. The Japanese are working out a new paradigm. le has 
to embrace the digital revolution ; it must also emphasize rates of return on 
equity and concentrate on shareholder value as American corporations do. 
As the economy has globalized,Japan has been forced to open up its domes­
tic market. Many time-honored practices, like life-time employment, will 
have to change. But I have seen the strength of the Japanese people, and the 
quality of their education. While they may not have encouraged as many 
entrepreneurs in new start-ups as Americans have done, their young men 
and women do not lack imagination, creativity, or innovative ideas. Within 
five co ten years, the Japanese will come fighting back. 
33. Korea: At the Crossroads 
I did not have happy memories of the Koreans because the first ones I met 
were in Japanese uniform. They were one of two groups of auxiliaries the 
Japanese brought to Singapore, the other being Taiwanese. The Koreans 
were the toughs and as heavy-handed as the Japanese soldiers. The Taiwanese 
were used as interpreters, speaking Hokkien, Singapore's major Chinese 
dialect. 
After the war, South Korea's economic dynamism overrode my past 
prejudices. I visited the country in October 1979 when President Park 
Chung Hee received me in his official residence, the Blue House. Park was 
an ascetic-looking man, small and wiry with a sharp face and a narrow 
nose. He had been chosen and trained as a military officer by the Japanese. 
He must have been among the best of his generation. 
He wanted close relations with Asean and hoped I would help. He said 
the prospects of peace in the Korean peninsula were not good. The South 
did not want another war, placing peace first and reunification second. The 
North wanted to reunify by force. I asked if the American commitment 
would go beyond 1981, the date President Carter had announced for the 
withdrawal of U.S. forces. He replied that Carter's Defense Secretary Brown 
had promised security after 1981 and had stated publicly that the security 
of South Korea was vital to the United States. I said Carter's 1976 election 
pledge to withdraw troops from Korea was popular with Americans; if it 
again became popular, Carter could change. He agreed, saying he was 
uneasy over U.S. policy which was affected by four-year election cycles. 
532 From Third World to First 
He had no small talk at dinner that night. His daughter, in her twen­
ties and English-speaking, kept the conversation flowing. Park said his 
training was that of a military officer, and his job was to take the advice 
and recommendations of the experts whom he had appointed as ministers 
and top officials, and decide policy. 
His prime minister, Choi Kyu Hah, was an able man, Japanese­
educated. Choi's wife was equally intelligent and well-educated in Japanese. 
She and her husband still read Japanese novels and newspapers. The Korean 
intelligentsia, like the Taiwanese, were as much influenced by the Japanese 
as I was by the British. Park had been in power for 18 years and had got the 
economy thriving with a disciplined and united people, all of whom were 
determined to achieve economic modernization. Following Japanese prac­
tice, he jealously protected his domestic market and exported aggressively. 
He encouraged, even forced Koreans to save, denying them luxuries like 
color television sets which they were exporting in increasing numbers. I was 
impressed by his strong will and grim resolve for Korea to succeed. Without 
Park, Korea might never have made it as an industrialized nation. Five days 
after I left Korea, Park was assassinated by his closest aide, the chief of intel­
ligence. According to the government, it was part of a plot to seize power. 
Their press reported that the intelligence chief had feared being replaced 
after Park criticized him for his failure in handling unrest when students and 
workers fought police in Pusan. 
My visit confirmed my assessment that the Korean people were tough 
and capable of enduring great hardships. Successive invaders had swept 
across the steppes of central Asia and come to a halt in the peninsula. 
They were of Mongolian stock with distinctive facial and physical fea­
tures, easily distinguishable from the Japanese or Chinese. They were 
proud of their history and took me to Kyongju, their ancient cultural cen­
ter where the tombs of Shilla dynasty kings had yielded elaborate artifacts 
of gold and precious stones. 
Their hatred for the Japanese was intense. Thirty-five years of merci­
less Japanese suppression of any rebellious activity had left deep scars on 
their soul. They remembered the Japanese invasions over the last 500 
years, each of which they repelled. Even among the most Japanized of the 
Korean elite, including Prime Minister Choi and his wife, both com-
Korea: At the Crossroads 533 
pletely at home in Japanese language, literature, and culture, there was an 
underlying antipathy toward their former rulers. The Japanese were hard 
on the Koreans because they resisted colonization and domination. They 
had also resisted Chinese overlordship for a thousand years, but they did 
not have that same deep antipathy for the Chinese. They had adopted the 
Chinese script and with it had imbibed the teachings of Confucius. 
Korean students in American universities have shown that they are as 
bright as the Japanese or Chinese. But although physically Koreans are 
hardier, they cannot equal the Japanese in cohesiveness and dedication to 
their companies. Korean workers and unions were quiescent as long as 
there was martial law. When it was lifted, the unions became militant 
with go-slows, sit-ins, and strikes. They demanded more pay and better 
conditions regardless of what was happenin g to their export markets. 
Korean employers and unions never achieved the cooperative relationship 
that Japanese companies and their unions enjoy. Japanese unions never 
damaged their companies ' competitive position however sharp their dis­
putes with their employers over who got what. 
The Koreans are a fearsome people. When they riot, they are as orga­
nized and nearly as disciplined as the riot police who confront them, 
policemen who resemble gladiators in their helmets with plastic visors 
and plastic shields. When their workers and students fight in the streets 
with these policemen, they look like soldiers at war. Their strikers squat 
on the ground to listen to speeches and pump fists into the air rhythmi­
cally. They are an intense people not given to compromise, and when they 
oppose authority, they do so with vigor and violence. 
I made two more visits to South Korea in the 1980s to meet Presidents 
Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo. President Kim Young Sam I met in 
Singapore in 1996. All four Korean leaders, from Park to Kim, were 
deeply concerned over their country's geopolitica l vulnerability, caught 
between three huge and powerful neighbors, China, Russia, and Japan. 
When I met Chun in Seoul in 1986, I was struck by his preoccupa­
tion with and fear of North Korea. I found this strange. The South's pop­
ulation was twice that of the North. They were immensely richer and had 
534 From Third World to First 
access to better military equipment from America. The traumatic experi­
ence of the commun ist invasion must have left deep scars and an abiding 
fear of the ferocity of their northern brethren. The Korean foreign minis­
ters I met all spoke with awe of the military might and prowess of the 
North, despite its parlous economy. 
Another issue which dominated my discussions with South Korea's 
leaders was trade and investments between the newly industrializing 
economies (NIEs), which included South Korea and Singapore, and the 
developed countries of Europe and America. With President Chun, in 
1986, I raised my concern at the growing protectionist sentiments in 
America and Europe. If we, the NIEs, did not open up our markets to re­
ciprocate the free access we had to America and Europe, they would find 
it unbearable and protectionism would grow. He agreed that the NIEs 
should liberalize. Korea was doing so in a systematic and steady way, to be 
completed in two years. I pointed out that after his liberalization, Korea's 
tariffs would still be high at 16 to 20 percent. Chun's response was that 
Korea was not a rich country. It had a per capita income of only 
US$2,000, less than Singapore's, and it had a debt of US$46.5 billion 
besides the burden of defense. 
When I spoke to their four major business associations over lunch in 
Seoul in 1986, I found them most reluctant to open up their markets. Two 
years later, at lunch with the same four associations, I discussed the need to 
increase their imports, urging that they and other NIEs should discuss 
with the industrial nations in the OECD (Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development) ways to narrow trade imbalances. This 
time they were more receptive, realizing that their position was not ten­
able in the longer run. 
During Chun's presidency, massive demonstrations and riots brought 
Seoul to a standstill from time to time. Toward the end of his term, they 
were endemic. Roh, as his key aide, moved skillfully to lower tensions and 
gathered support to run and win the next presidential election. 
Roh Tae Woo was a quiet and serious man. When we first met in July 
1986, he was a minister in Chun's cabinet. He spoke highly of Singapore's 
clean government. His president had tried to eliminate corruption but 
had found this not easy. How had we tackled it? I explained our system: 
Korea: At the Crossroads 535 
first, good intelligence; next, an impersonal, not a subjective approach; 
third, solid backing from the top for anticorruption investigation and 
prosecution. As his Democratic Justice Party (DJP) was not a communist 
party, I said he could not dispense with the existing bureaucracy and start 
afresh, but had to use it. He could slowly ease out older senior officials 
and bring in younger people who were untainted, and ensure they main­
tained high standards . They should be paid well. I emphasized, however, 
that unless the top leaders were beyond reproach, and the higher echelons 
cleaned up before the lower, it would be a waste of time. 
I next met Roh in 1988 when he was president . He asked how I had 
stayed in power for so long, winning successive elections. Because, I 
replied, people knew I did not lie and was sincere in advancing their 
interests. Ordinary people could not follow the intricacies of an economic 
or a political problem, so they learned whom to trust. To win such trust, I 
never said anything which I did not believe in, and people slowly recog­
nized that I was honest and sincere. This was my most powerful asset. It 
was also U.S. President Reagan's strength. He had good speechwriters. 
He worked on their drafts, using their ideas, but putting them into his 
own words. He did not allow himself to be "voiced over" by his speech­
writers, so when he delivered a speech, he came across as a man of sincer­
ity and conviction. I advised Roh not to compete with Kim Dae Jung in 
making powerful speeches. Roh had shown the people that he could keep 
cool in a crisis with massive riots and disorder before the election, and had 
shown humility. These were assets he should build on. 
Roh had coopted Kim Young Sam, one of the two major opposition 
leaders, into his party. This enabled Kim to become the first elected civil­
ian president in 1992. He made cleaning up corruption his major cam­
paign issue. He sacked three cabinet ministers within weeks of their 
appointment for various corrupt practices, removed several senior judges, 
and sacked and imprisoned a number of senior military officers. The army 
acquiesced. Several Korean television and newspaper groups visited 
Singapore to do documentaries and articles on our anticorruption law and 
enforcement system. 
In 1996, I met President Kim Young Sam when he visited Singapore. 
A dapper, well-dressed man, he proudly told me that he jogged many 
536 From Third World to First 
kilometers every morning. He said that we shared common values like the 
importance of the family unit and a social network to support the family. 
I added that our most important common interest was the strategic 
importance of the U.S. presence in Asia. 
The situation in the North had changed dramatically. Kim described 
the leaders of North Korea as crazy and capable of irrational acts. They 
had an armed force of 1.1 million soldiers but their weapons were out­
dated, supply lines weak, and logistics vulnerable . 
Kim had said when he took office that he would not reopen old 
issues. But as domestic pressures increased, he reversed his position in 
late 1995 and got the national assembly to pass a special law to lift the 
statute of limitations for the 1979 coup and for murder, sedition, corrup­
tion, and other crimes related to the 1980 Kwangju massacre, when the 
military had killed several hundred civilian protestors. His two predeces­
sors were arrested and charged. I was startled to see them on television 
brought to court in remand prison clothes, handcuffed and humiliated . 
Chun was sentenced to death and Roh to 22 years and 6 months in 
prison for their role in the 1979 coup and 1980 Kwangju killings. Both 
were also fined for taking bribes during their presidential terms. On 
appeal, these sentences were later reduced to life sentence for Chun and 
17 years for Roh. 
Soon after, President Kim Young Sam himself was engulfed in a huge 
corruption scandal when a large chaebol (conglomerate), the Hanbo Group, 
collapsed, owing billions of dollars to several government-controlled banks. 
Kim's son was prosecuted for taking some US$7 million and sentenced to 
three years' jail, with a fine of US$1.5 million. The opposition alleged that 
Kim himself had received bribes from the Hanbo Group and that he had 
grossly exceeded the legal spending limits for his election. President Kim 
made a public apology on television, but refused to disclose details. The 
standing of the incumbent president and his ruling party collapsed after the 
widely publicized scandals of corruption and mismanagement of the econ­
omy. Because of the ensuing economic crisis, South Korea required the assis­
tance of the IMF. 
In December 1997, Kim Dae Jung, a veteran opposition leader stand­
ing for the fourth time, won the presidential election. He had forged an 
Korea: At the Crossroads 537 
electoral alliance with Kim Jong Pil, the first Korean Central Intelligence 
Agency (KCIA) chief who had once ordered his capture. 
As a prominent dissident, Kim Dae Jung had spent many years in the 
United States and become an advocate of the universal application of 
human rights and democracy regardless of cultural values. As an opposi­
tion leader, he had written an article in the magazine Foreign Affairs in 
response to my interview with the editor, Fareed Zakaria. He did not 
agree that history and culture made for different attitudes of a people and 
different norms of government. Foreign Affairs invited me to reply. I chose 
not to. The difference in our views cannot be resolved by argument . It 
will be settled by history, by the way events will develop in the next 50 
years. It takes more than one generation for the political, economic, 
social, and cultural implications of policies to work themselves out. It is a 
process of attrition, of social Darwinism. 
As the president-elect, Kim Dae Jung agreed to Kim Young Sam's 
pardon of the two former presidents then serving long terms of imprison­
ment for treason, bribery, and, in the case of Chun, murder. They were 
freed in December 1997 and attended the presidential swearing-in cere­
mony in February 1998. After his swearing-in, President Kim Dae Jung 
shook hands with Chun and Roh, a gesture of "reconciliation and har­
mony" in Korean society, as the presidential spokesman put it. It was 
staged before a crowd of 40,000. Whether this political theater restored 
the people's confidence in their system of government is open to question. 
South Korea's political institutions would have suffered less damage 
if, like Mandela's government in South Africa, they had closed all past 
accounts. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa for­
gave all those who had committed atrocities during the apartheid regime 
if they declared their previous wrongdoings. While it might not have 
achieved reconciliation, the commission did not worsen the divide. 
Their trials not only destroyed Chun Doo Hwan and Roh Tae Woo, 
they also diminished the men who had helped to create modern Korea, 
leaving the people cynical and disillusioned with all authority . It will be 
some time before Koreans regain their esteem for their leaders. Chun and 
Roh had played by Korean standards of their time, and by those rules they 
were not villains. Pressured by American public opinion against having 
538 From Third World to First 
another military man as successor, Roh had allowed power to go into the 
hands of Kim Young Sam. These events have sent the wrong signals to 
military leaders in charge of other countries, that it is dangerous to hand 
over power to civilian politicians who seek popular support. 
In 1999, I attended a meeting in Seoul as a member of the International 
Advisory Council (IAC) to the Federation of Korean Industries . At a 
forum on 22 October, IAC members had a discussion with the leaders of 
Korean chaebols. These chaebols are Korean versions of Japanese zaiba­
tsus. In every major industry where zaibatsus have been successful, chae­
bols followed to compete with cheaper labor and lower costs. Like the 
Japanese, they went for market share, ignoring cash flow and the bottom 
line. As in Japan, the whole Korean domestic economy, especially the 
high savings of their workers, provided the base for chaebols to get capital 
at low interest rates and target specific industries . 
With the end of the Cold War, the external situation changed. Like 
Japan, Korea had to open its domestic and especially its financial markets. 
Their chaebols had borrowed about US$ l 50 billion in foreign currency 
for rapid industrial expansion in Korea and abroad-in China, the former 
communist countries in eastern Europe, the Russian Federation, and the 
central Asian republics of the former Soviet Union. These investments 
were not based on expected returns on equity but on aggressive expansion 
to capture market share. When they were unable to repay the interest 
due, toward the end of 1997 the Korean currency, the won, collapsed. The 
IMF came to their rescue. Three weeks later, Kim Dae Jung won his elec­
tion as president. 
I told the chaebol chiefs that Korea was at a crossroad. They could not 
continue with the old paradigm based on the Japanese model, because the 
Japanese themselves had hit the wall. Korea and Japan were now part of 
an integrated global economic and financial system, and would have to 
abide by the rules that the United States and the European Union had set­
tled for the IMF, World Bank, and WTO. This required them to be as 
competitive in their investments, with the eye on the bottom line, as any 
American or European corporation. The question was how to get from 
where they were to where they must be if they were to be competitive. 
Korea: At the Crossroads 539 
Chaebols had grown into widespreading conglomerates. Now they should 
concentrate on what they had done best and make those their core busi­
nesses, hiving off their noncore businesses. Next, they needed managers 
who had entrepreneurial drive if their businesses were to thrive. 
The chaebol leaders were pleased that I thought Confucianist culture 
had not caused their collapse, but that their weakness was their informal 
system of doing business and their disregard for the rate of return on 
equity and the bottom line. This was made worse by their not having 
open, transparent systems, level playing fields, and standard international 
accounting practices. Hong Kong and Singapore, both Confucianist soci­
eties, had withstood the financial storm because both had British systems 
of law, business methods that were transparent, accounting practices of 
international standard, open tenders and binding contracts negotiated on 
level playing fields, and bank loans made at arm's length. Korea had to 
adopt these practices. Korean business practice followed that of the 
Japanese, based more on informal relations and less on formal rules and 
the law. The chaebol leaders understood the need for such restructuring 
but were reluctant to give up family control of the corporate empires they 
had built up in the last four decades, and hand over the destinies of their 
constituent companies to managers who had been accustomed to leaving 
the entrepreneurial decisions to the founders. 
After the IAC meeting, I called on President Kim Dae Jung at the 
Blue House. In his mid-seventies , he was broad-built and above-average 
in height for a Korean of his generation. He walked slowly with a limp, 
the result of an injury sustained from an attempt on his life in 1971, 
reportedly by KCIA agents. He had a serious, even solemn, expression, 
until he broke into the occasional smile. He posed a series of issues, start­
ing with North-South relations. Methodically, he went through the items 
he had in mind. He wanted a critique of his policies, beginning with his 
"sunshine policy." The aims of this policy were, first, to prevent war by 
maintaining a strong deterrent stance; second, to reunify the two Koreas 
without damaging or threatening the North Korean regime; third, to cre­
ate an environment in which the two could cooperate in economics and 
business at the private level. 
I said it made sense to help the North Koreans change from within by 
transferring technology, management , and know-how and encouraging 
540 From Third World to First 
them to develop. North Korea could raise its standard of living and be 
less of a burden on the South. However, this must be accompanied by 
more people-to-people contact, particularly exchanges between think 
tanks, universities, and opinion formulators, to change their mental out­
look. 
He then asked for my assessment of Chinese-North Korean relations. 
I did not believe the chemistry between old leaders like Deng Xiaoping 
and Kim 11 Sung existed between Jiang Zemin and Kim Jong 11. The 
older generation had fought together as comrades in arms in the Korean 
War. The present generation of leaders did not share that camaraderie. It 
was not in China's interest to have war and disorder in the Korean penin­
sula. What China wanted was a status quo that would enable trade with 
and investments from the South to continue. Neither was it in China's 
interest to have the two Koreas reunited. Then China would lose the 
North Korean card against the United States and South Korea. Kim had 
thought through his problems; he simply wanted my confirmation or 
contradiction of his views. 
Kim impressed me by his stand on East Timor. The recent crisis and 
the Internet age, he said, had brought northeast and southeast Asia closer 
together. Although East Timor was geographically far from South Korea, 
the conflict had indirectly affected them. It would be better if all coun­
tries in Asia could cooperate as one, on a bigger scale. That was why he 
had decided to send combat troops (a battalion of 420) to East Timor, 
even though his opposition in the national assembly was against it. He 
had another reason: In 1950, 16 countries came to South Korea's aid and 
hundreds of thousands died in the Korean War. South Korea would have 
failed in its responsibilities if it did not help the UN in East Timor. 
Making northeast and southeast Asia one region, I believed, was a matter 
of time. The two subregional economies were increasingly intertwined. 
The Korean media had expected us to discuss our differing views on 
Asian (i.e., Confucianist) values, and on democracy and human rights. I 
told them the subject was not discussed ; we were both in our late seven­
ties and unlikely to change our views. History will decide who had a bet­
ter reading of Confucian culture. 
In Kim I found a man who had been tempered through many a crisis. 
He had learned to control his emotions in order to achieve his higher pur-
Korea: At the Crossroads 541 
poses. He had been captured by the KCIA when he was in Japan and tor­
tured, and would probably have been killed but for the intervention of the 
Americans. Yet in order to win the election in 1997 he formed an alliance 
with a former KCIA director, Kim Jong Pil, and made him his prime 
minister when he won the election. 
A significant reason for South Korea's present political, economic, and 
social difficulties was that the transition from martial law to free-for-all 
democratic politics had been too sudden. They had no established tradi­
tion of law enforcement to control public assemblies or rules to regulate 
trade unions and require them to hold secret ballots before going on strike 
or taking industrial action. In Singapore, when we took office in 1959, the 
British had left us a whole set of subsidiary legislation for minor offenses, 
so when Emergency rule ended there were other means to keep public 
protests from going beyond tolerable limits and upsetting law and order. 
If the Koreans had democratized more gradually and had first put in place 
the necessary legislation to modulate demonstration s and protests, the 
people might have been less prone to excesses in their protests, especially 
the angry confrontations of workers and students with the police. 
It will take some time to renew the social contract between leaders 
and people. They need to restore people's confidence that there will be fair 
play between the successful and the less successful, between the better and 
the lesser educated, between management and labor. In their dash for 
rapid growth, successive presidents allowed a policy that favored high 
rewards for industrialists, managers, and engineers as against workers, 
widening the wealth gap as their GDP rose. Once restored in a new social 
contract, Koreans will forge ahead with vigor again. They are a dynamic, 
industrious, resolute, and able people. Their intense culture makes them 
achievement-oriented. 
After several false starts, the North and South Korean presidents finally 
met at a summit in Pyongyang on 13 June 2000. The live telecast of their 
meetings astonished South Koreans. The much maligned North Korean 
leader, Kim Jong Il, demonstrated warmth, humor and friendliness. A 
542 From Third World to First 
wave of euphoria swept South Koreans. Even the most skeptical were 
impressed. But doubts remain. Was this not the man who ordered the 
assassination of South Korean ministers at a wreath-laying ceremony in 
Rangoon in 1983 and the bombing of a South Korean airliner in 1987? 
Within days, U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright visited 
Beijing and Seoul. In Seoul, she said U.S. forces would remain in Korea. 
But if the thaw continues, she must expect the North to press for their 
withdrawal and the South co agitate in support. And if North Korea stops 
its missile development, it will remove the need for America's national 
missile defense system, which is co guard against a missile attack by a 
"rogue" state like North Korea, not China. 
I met President Jiang Zemin in Beijing on the afternoon of that 
Korean summit. He was in high spirits, recounting with pleasure the 
handshake of the two leaders he had watched on television. Jiang had 
much to be satisfied about, Kim Jong 11 having made a rare visit to 
Beijing co discuss the matter with him two weeks before the event. 
34. Hong Kong's Transition 
I first visited Hong Kong in 1954 on an Italian liner, the Asia. She stayed 
three nights in Hong Kong, allowing Choo and me to wander around the 
colony on foot. It was a charming city on the island fronting the harbor, 
with a growing township across the water on the Kowloon side. It was 
attractive because behind the town center was the Peak, some 1,000 feet 
high with roads and houses dotting the hillside. 
The people were hardworking, goods were cheap, service was excel­
lent. I was taken to a shop one morning, had myself measured by the tai­
lor, and ordered two suits. In the afternoon, I went back for a fitting. That 
night, the suits were delivered to my cabin, something Singapore tailors 
could not have done. I did not understand then that when the commu­
nists "liberated" the mainland in 1949, with the influx of some 1 to 2 
million refugees from China had come some of the best entrepreneurs, 
professionals, and intellectuals from Shanghai and the provinces of 
Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and Guangdong. They formed a thick layer of talent 
that was to transform Hong Kong into one of the most dynamic cities in 
the world, helped by the more enterprising and resourceful of the Chinese 
workers who had decided to leave China rather than live under commu­
nist rule. 
To the world at large, Hong Kong and Singapore are two similar 
Chinese cities of approximately the same size. To me there were as many 
contrasts as similarities. Hong Kong has twice the land area and twice the 
population packed on the island, Kowloon peninsula, and the New 
544 From Third World to First 
Territories. Hong Kong had a bleaker economic and political environ­
ment in 1949, totally dependent on the mainland's restraint. China's 
People's Liberation Army could march in any time they were ordered to. 
But despite uncertainty and the fear of a disastrous tomorrow, or the day 
after, Hong Kong thrived. 
Singapore did not then face such dire prospects. I was relieved we 
were not living so precariously under such intense pressures, as Hong 
Kong was. Even after Malaya became independent in 195 7, Singapore 
was still linked economically and physically to the peninsula, with people 
and business to-ing and fro-ing. Only in 1965, after we were asked to 
leave Malaysia, did we face as bleak a future. But unlike Hong Kong we 
did not have a million and a half refugees from the mainland . Perhaps 
if we had, and with them had come some of the best entrepreneurs and 
the most industrious, resourcefu l, and energetic people, we would have 
gained that extra cutting edge. Indeed, a similar refugee inflow from the 
mainland in 1949 also helped Taiwan. Without it, Taiwan would not 
have had the top talent that had governed China until 1949. Their 
administration, with American aid, transformed Taiwan. When all this 
happened in 1949, I did not understand the importance of talent, espe­
cially entrepreneurial talent, and that trained talent is the yeast that 
transforms a society and makes it rise. 
I next visited Hong Kong in May 1962. In eight years, it had moved 
way ahead of Singapore, judging from the buildings and shops I saw. 
After independence in 1965, I made a point of visiting Hong Kong 
almost every year to see how they handled their difficulties, and whether 
there were any lessons I could learn from them. I saw Hong Kong as a 
source of inspiration , of ideas of what was possible given a hard-driving 
society. I also wanted to attract some of their businesspeople, especially 
their manufacturers, to set up textile and other factories in Singapore. The 
Hong Kong media did not look kindly upon my efforts and wrote highly 
critical reports of Singapore to dissuade their people from leaving. 
In February 1970, the University of Hong Kong conferred on me an 
honorary degree of Doctor of Law. In my address, I said, "As pioneers in 
modernisation, Hong Kong and Singapore can act as catalysts to accelerate 
the transforming of traditional agricultural societies around them .... " I 
hoped that "they may become dissemination points, not simply of the 
Hong Kong's Transition 545 
sophisticated manufacture of the developed world, but more vital, of social 
values and disciplines, of skills and expertise. " A decade later they both 
did. 
After this visit, I wrote to our Economic Development Board that 
with the political uncertainty because of China and the expiry in 1997 of 
the 99-year lease of the New Territories to Britain, Singapore could 
attract some of their brains and their skilled workers. We could also lend 
Hong Kong our skills and credit when they were short. 
My admiration for Hong Kong's people and their capacity to bounce 
back after each setback never diminished. They suffered as grievously in 
the 1970s as Singapore did because of the oil crisis, but they adjusted 
more quickly. Their shops cut prices, their workers accepted pay cuts. The 
few trade unions they had did not fight market forces. In Singapore, we 
had to soften the blow of inflation and recession and buffer our workers 
from a sudden drop in living standards, helping to sort out problems 
between management and unions. 
People in Hong Kong depended not on the government but on them­
selves and their families. They worked hard and tried their luck in busi­
ness, hawking or making widgets, or buying and selling. The drive to 
succeed was intense; family and extended family ties were strong. Long 
before Milton Friedman held up Hong Kong as a model of a free­
enterprise economy, I had seen the advantage of having little or no social 
safety net. It spurred Hong Kong's people to strive to succeed. There was 
no social contract between the colonial government and them. Unlike 
Singaporeans, they could not and did not defend themselves or their col­
lective interests. They were not a nation-indeed, were not allowed to 
become a nation. China would not have permitted it, and the British 
never tried it. That was the great difference between Hong Kong and 
Singapore. 
We had to be a nation or we would cease to exist. We had to subsidize 
education, health, and housing even though I tried to avoid the debilitat­
ing effects of welfarism. But the Singaporean cannot match the Hong 
Konger in drive and motivation. In Hong Kong when people fail, they 
blame themselves or their bad luck, pick themselves up, and try again, 
hoping their luck will change. Singaporeans have different attitudes to 
government and to life. They prefer job security and freedom from worry. 
546 From Third World to First 
When they do not succeed, they blame the government since they assume 
its duty is to ensure that their lives get better. They expect the govern­
ment not only to arrange a level playing field but, at the end of the race, 
to give prizes even to those who have not done so well. Singaporeans vote 
for their MPs and ministers and expect them to distribute whatever prizes 
there are. 
A Hong Kong entrepreneur who settled in Singapore summed it up 
for me succinctly. When he established textile and garment factories in 
Singapore in the early 1970s, he brought his Hong Kong managers with 
him and hired several more Singaporeans. The Singaporean managers 
were still working for him in 1994, while his Hong Kong managers had 
set up their own businesses and were competing against him. They saw no 
reason why they should be working for him when they knew the trade as 
well as he did. All they needed was a little capital, and the moment they 
had that, off they went. The Singaporean lacks that entrepreneurial drive, 
the willingness to take risks, succeed, and be a tycoon. In recent years 
there have been encouraging signs of change. When the region was enjoy­
ing rapid growth, more young professionals and executives ventured out, 
first as salaried managers with incentive share options, and later on their 
own, when they knew the risks and were confident of making it. 
We were able to attract some entrepreneurs in textiles, garments, 
plastics, and jewellery, a few jade and ivory carvers, and some furniture 
makers from Hong Kong. In the 1960s and early 1970s, they were most 
welcome for the jobs they created and the optimism they generated. The 
best stayed on in Hong Kong where they could make more profits than in 
Singapore. But they set up branches as we had hoped, and sent their 
younger sons to look after the Singapore branch. 
After the 1984 Joint Declaration between the United Kingdom and 
China settling the colony's future was announced, I invited a group of 
their leading businesspeople and professionals to visit us during the week 
of our National Day celebrations that August. As a result, a group of 
Hong Kong tycoons together invested over S$2 billion in Singapore's 
largest convention and exhibition hall and office complex called Suntec 
City where we hosted the first ministerial meeting of the World Trade 
Organization in December 1996, a year after the building was completed. 
It was one of their many nest eggs scattered across the Pacific coastal 
Hong Kong's Transition 547 
cities, mainly of North America and Australasia. Their media believed 
Singapore wanted to cream off their talent, but it was in our interest to 
have Hong Kong succeed after it returned to Chinese sovereignty. To raid 
and deplete Hong Kong of talent is a one-off exercise. A thriving Hong 
Kong will be a continuing source of business and benefits. 
Hong Kong's British rulers had governed in the old imperial tradition­
haughty, aloof, condescend ing to the locals, and even to me, because I was 
Chinese. The earlier governors were promoted from the ranks of the 
British colonial service. This changed after 1971. Murray MacLehose was 
from the British foreign service, a superior service. He decided to visit 
Singapore before he took up his appointment. Hong Kong was plagued 
by corruption; he wanted to see how we had kept it under control. He 
wanted also to see what we had done in education, especially our poly­
technics. Hong Kong had none; they had spent almost nothing on techni­
cal education. He wanted to see our public housing; he wanted to 
improve their housing before conditions became critical. 
The British provided an honest administration, except for some 10 
years before MacLehose became governor. Corruption then was so bad that 
he had to introduce strong measures based on Singapore's anticorrup­
tion laws and practices. Of course the colonial rules of the game favored 
the British business community. Hong Kong & Shanghai Bank and 
Chartered Bank were note issuers. The British hongs (big trading compa­
nies, later to become conglomer ates) enjoyed a privileged position, but 
their privileges were gradually diminished as British rule reached its last 
decade when many hongs were bought out by Hong Kong Chinese. 
Before the next governor, David Wilson, took up his appointment in 
1987, he too visited Singapore to see how a majority ethnic Chinese com­
munity had organized itself and sought to resolve its problems. He was 
also a foreign service officer, a China specialist. Wilson wanted to know 
about Singapore's experience in gaining independence. I told him our cir­
cumstances were different. We had been part of Malaysia, then unintend­
edly became independent and had to manage our own destiny. The 
Special Administrative Region (SAR) of Heng Kong would be part of 
China. Any Hong Kong chief executive would have to understand China 
548 From Third World to First 
and learn to live with its leaders, while protecting Hong Kong's interests. 
He would not have complete freedom to act. 
Until 1992, British policy was to consult and negotiate with China 
any basic change they proposed to make in policy before they announced 
it publicly. This was to achieve what the British called a "through train." 
In other words, there was to be no change of either engine or carriages 
when it came to the crossing point between British Hong Kong on 30 
June 1997 and Chinese Hong Kong on 1 July 1997. After the shock of 
Tiananmen in 1989, the British government felt it should do something 
beyond what was agreed with the Chinese in the 1984 Joint Declaration. 
The British wanted to satisfy their conscience that they had done their 
best to protect the way of life of Hong Kong people after Hong Kong was 
returned to China. 
Six weeks after Tiananmen, we offered to give 25,000 Hong Kong 
families Approval In-Principle (AIP) permanent residence, without their 
having to move to Singapore until the need arose. This AIP would be 
valid for five years and could be extended for another five. It did not draw 
talent away from Hong Kong at a time of great uncertainty. Huge queues 
formed outside our Singapore Commission in Hong Kong to get the 
application forms, and nearly caused a riot. When I met Governor Wilson 
in Hong Kong in January 1990, I assured him that I had no intention to 
damage Hong Kong by the offer of AIPs, that we would lend Hong Kong 
our skills and credit when they were short, and vice versa, and each would 
profit from the capital, skills, and talent of the other. We had not 
expected such a tumultuous response. Many who applied did not qualify, 
because they did not have the necessary education or skills. After a year, 
we had granted a total of 50,000 AIPs, double the intended number. By 
1997, only 8,500 had moved to Singapore. Hong Kong soon recovered 
from the shock ofTiananmen and was doing well. The people earned good 
money in Hong Kong, more than they could in Singapore or elsewhere. 
Indeed, many who had emigrated to Canada, Australia, and New Zealand 
later returned to work in Hong Kong, often leaving their families behind. 
Chris Patten, like his predecessors Wilson and MacLehose, stopped in 
Singapore in July 1992 on his way to take up his appointment in Hong 
Kong. After an hour's discussion, I sensed he wanted to stretch the limits 
of what the British had _agreed with the Chinese and asked, "What cards 
Hong Kong's Transition 549 
do you have? What's new?" Instead of answering he simply repeated my 
question, "What's new?" I felt uneasy that he was contemplating reforms 
that would breach the agreement. Hong Kong journalists had come to 
Singapore to interview me after my meeting with Patten. To prevent any 
misreporting, instead of meeting them I issued a statement: "I believe if 
the objectives he [Patten} decides upon are within the framework of the 
Joint Declaration and the Basic Law, he will have firm grounds to govern 
and build upon ... the best measure of his success will be that the system 
he leaves behind continues to work well for Hong Kong beyond 1997." 
In October 1992, after a visit to China, I went to Hong Kong. Patten 
had announced that he would expand the electorate for functional con­
stituencies representing businesspeople, professionals, and other special 
interest groups by including as voters all their employees. Interviewed by 
the press, I said, "Patten's proposals were very imaginative about increas­
ing the depth of democracy .... Very ingenious. His proposals slip into 
the blank spaces of the Basic Law and the Joint Declaration. " But I added, 
"(Patten's} blueprint resembled more an agenda for action of a nationalist 
leader mobilising his people to fight for independence from a colonial 
power, than a valedictory programme of a departing colonial governor." 
Privately, I cautioned Patten when I met him in Government House, that 
he had negated the meaning of "functional constituencies" because he had 
widened it beyond these functional groups of professionals or business­
people for whom they were intended, to include all workers employed by 
them. 
In mid-Decem ber, I returned to Hong Kong for a lecture at Hong 
Kong University . Patten, as chancellor of the university , took the chair. In 
answer to a question from the audience on his proposed reforms, I read 
out portions of speeches made in the House of Lords by two former gover­
nors, Lord Murray Maclehose and Lord David Wilson, and an interview 
by Sir Percy Cradock, Thatcher's political adviser who had negotiated 
with the Chinese. All three had made clear that Patten's course of action 
was contrary to what they, on the British team, had negotiated and agreed 
with the Chinese government. I thought it better to state my position in 
his presence so that he could reply if he wanted to. He did not. 
Patten spent the last five years of colonial rule entangled in contro­
versy with the Chinese government. The Chinese reacted to Patten's move 
550 From Third World to First 
with anger. If Britain wanted it that way, they were prepared to scrap the 
whole agreement. They announced that they would negate Patten's 
changes. In July 1993, the Chinese formed a preliminary working com­
mittee to prepare for the post-1 July 1997 period. In August 1994, the 
standing committee of the National People's Congress voted to replace 
the Legislative Council (Legco) and the urban and regional councils and 
district boards. The governor and the British government in London did 
not take this rejection seriously. Patten held elections in September 1995; 
he included nine new functional constituencies and had widened the elec­
torate to include the whole working population of 2.7 million voters. The 
Chinese leaders declared chat it would not recognize the electoral results, 
that the political structures being set up by the British were not in accor­
dance with the Basic Law and the Joint Declaration and would be 
scrapped, and the legislative council reconstituted. The governor believed 
that the Chinese government would eventually acquiesce because not to 
do so would be to go against the people's wishes and would be costly 
internationally. 
I had a glimpse of official British thinking after a discussion in May 
1993 with Malcolm Rifkind, then under-secretary of state of defense, 
later foreign secretary. The British felt a sense of obligation to ensure that 
democracy was a basic way of life in Hong Kong by 1997, and they 
believed, even without a referendum, that that was the colony's desire. I 
said what many Hong Kong people wanted was to have nothing to do 
with China till the end of time. Since this was not possible, surely the 
best way forward, if they were to continue to thrive and prosper, was to 
get Hong Kong's administrators and potential leaders to get to know and 
understand their counterparts in China and learn to protect the island's 
special needs. Rifkind said they were trying to build an entrenched con­
stitutional structure in Hong Kong to make it more difficult for China to 
destroy democracy, in effect to build a system of guarantees for freedoms 
which the West took for granted, such as freedom from arrest and free­
dom to travel. If that system were entrenched, it would be more difficult 
for China to destroy it. I said it would be an exercise in futility. Hong 
Kong's chief executive had to adjust and accommodate China's overriding 
interests. With only four years left, it was not possible to imbue Hong 
Hong Kong's Transition 551 
Kong people with democratic values and cultural impulses which had 
never existed there. This was a test of wills that Britain could not win. 
I came to the conclusion that the British were banking on the 
Americans to pick up the cudgels against China on human rights and 
democracy. America had the leverage in its trade deficit of US$20 billion 
for the year 1992, which was to balloon to US$40 billion by 1997. 
Another leverage was its yearly grant of Most Favored Nation (MFN) sta­
tus for Chinese exports. But China could counter this by not cooperating 
on nonproliferation of nuclear material and missile technology capabilities. 
The Western media wanted to democratize China through Hong 
Kong, or at least put pressure on China through democratic changes 
introduced into Hong Kong. So they backed Governor Patten's belated 
and unilateral political reforms. This encouraged some of the territory's 
politicians to believe they could behave as if Hong Kong could be inde­
pendent. 
More important than all these political moves between the British 
and Americans on one side and the Chinese on the other, was the dra­
matic, unexpected economic development that took place in China. After 
Tiananmen in 1989, when investors from the Western countries stayed 
away, Chinese entrepreneurs from Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan had 
ventured into China. In three years, they were doing well. They showed a 
skeptical world that guanxi or personal relationships-speaking the same 
language, sharing the same culture, and not following the rules-would 
make up for deficiencies in the rule of law. These overseas Chinese were 
so successful that in November 1993, at the second World Chinese 
Entrepreneurs' Convention in Hong Kong, I warned them that if their 
investments in China disadvantaged their own adopted countries, they 
would exacerbate their relations with their own governments. 
Hong Kong stock and property markets had collapsed after the shock 
of Tiananmen at the prospect of the colony's return to China. Eight years 
later, China had achieved a complete turnaround in its economy, and 
Hong Kong was looking forward to continuing growth with a thriving 
China. As 1 July 1997 approached, the Hong Kong property markets 
and stock markets went steadily upward, demonstrating a confidence 
which no one could have predicted. Hong Kong businesspeople who had 
552 From Third World to First 
decided to stay, and nearly all did, had accepted the reality, that their 
future depended upon good relations with China. China's business done 
through Hong Kong would make the territory prosper until such time as 
Shanghai and other coastal cities built up their facilities. 
I was in Hong Kong for the week before the handover on 30 June 
1997 and met Tung Chee-hwa. In the six months since he had been cho­
sen as chief executive-designate of the Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region, he had undergone a sea change. From a very private person who 
had spent his life in the family shipping business, he found himself sud­
denly under the glare of the media, frequently questioned by tough jour­
nalists. He accepted that for Hong Kong to succeed, China must succeed. 
It was a sound basis for governing Hong Kong. I found the business and 
professional elite had adjusted psychologically to becoming a special 
region of China. So had the Hong Kong Chinese language media. Even 
the most irreverent of the Chinese newspapers, run by a maverick busi­
nessman who had abused and insulted Premier Li Peng, had toned down. 
The press knew what was out of bounds. 
Governor Patten, however, continued his bickering with Beijing to 
the very end. British leaders boycotted the swearing-in of the provisional 
legislature, declaring it was in breach of the Joint Declaration. Chinese 
leaders were not invited to the British farewell, but would not have 
attended in any case. The Chinese had wanted their contingent of uni­
formed troops to be in Hong Kong before the arrival of Jiang Zemin for 
the handover ceremony at midnight on 30 June. At first the British 
refused but eventually they allowed some 500 troops with light arms to 
come in at 9:00 P.M. When the Chinese announced the day before the 
deadline that they would send some 4,000 more troops to Hong Kong at 
4:00 A.M. on 1 July, the departing governor denounced this "appalling 
news." It was pointless. Sovereignty would have reverted to China at mid­
night on 30 June, and Hong Kong would already be Chinese territory. 
In the early hours of 1 July after the handover ceremonies, I heard a 
crowd using battery-powered megaphones shouting slogans for 10 to 15 
minutes. Later, I learned that some 3,000 demonstrators had done this 
with the police clearing the way for them in empty streets. Martin Lee, 
leader of the Democratic Party, was addressing crowds on continuing 
their fight for democracy from the balcony of the legislative council 
Hong Kong's Transition 553 
building. It was no revolutionary situation. The international media 
reported this ritual protest. 
Strangely, the mood in Hong Kong was muted. People had had 13 
years since the 1984 Joint Declaration to prepare for this moment. There 
was no jubilation at being reembraced by the motherland. But neither 
was sadness visible at the departure of the British, no fond farewells from 
the multitude at the farewell parade or when the royal yacht Britannia 
cast off its moorings to carry the last governor away. Patten had filled the 
last five years of British rule with acrimony . He had derailed the "through 
train" the Chinese had agreed to whereby the Legco elected in 1995 would 
have continued beyond reunification in 1997, and left behind a legisla­
ture with a less liberal set of rules for elections than if he had not unilater­
ally changed them. 
As they took charge on 1 July 1997, Chief Executive Tung and his 
top officials ran into the East Asian financial crisis, although they did not 
know this until 1998. Thailand devalued its baht on 2 July, triggering off 
a rot that spread through the region, on to Russia, and then Brazil. The 
Hong Kong dollar's peg to the U.S. dollar forced Hong Kong to increase 
its interest rates. That brought down property, share, and all asset prices, 
causing a recession and unemployment. Dissatisfaction with the govern­
ment increased. The expectations of Hong Kong people had changed. 
Under a foreign, colonial government they expected nothing but protec­
tion from the Chinese communists. Under a Chinese government of Hong 
Kongers, they expected much more. Hong Kong suffered from chicken 
flu, a rare virus that particularly threatened old people and young chil­
dren. A million birds had to be killed; their owners demanded compensa­
tion and got it. When red algae destroyed the stock of fish farmers, they 
too demanded and were given compensation. Then an investment house 
went bankrupt; investors who had deposited their share scrips with it 
were compensated. 
In Hong Kong for a conference in June 1999, I met many troubled peo­
ple, including some old friends and several new acquaintances. They ana­
lyzed their problems with clarity but could not see the solutions. They 
recounted that at the tail end of empire, the British had relaxed their gov-
554 From Third World to First 
ernance of Hong Kong. Rather than arouse protests and confrontations by 
implementing unpopular policies, they gave in to pressure groups, such 
as taxi drivers who had threatened a strike when the government wanted 
to phase out diesel for taxis to cut down pollution. Pressure groups have 
learned to counter and abort hard policies by mounting protests. Now 
with Hong Kong a part of China, their chief executive had no political 
strength to counter such action. Unlike the British governors, who took 
support from their Legislative Council (Legco) for granted, Tung faced leg­
islative councilors, none of whom felt any obligation to support his poli­
cies. His civil service secretaries had no electoral mandate to back their 
views when challenged by the elected members in Legco. 
Patten's attempt to strengthen the democratically elected legislative 
council failed. The Legco that was elected when Hong Kong was still 
under colonial rule was dissolved. There are deep divisions within the 
educated elite on how to go forward and make the present system work. 
The old system the British ran had been weakened and cannot cope with 
the new political situation. On one side are the pragmatists, businesspeo­
ple, and professionals who wanted to have a working relationship with the 
government in Beijing and were bitterly opposed to Patten's policies. On 
the other side are the academics, media, and professionals who wanted to 
build up as strong a constitutional defense against any heavy hand from 
Beijing as possible and, by garnering international support, especially 
from the United States, put pressure on China not to interfere in the 
affairs of the SAR. The pragmatists were not prepared to enter the politi­
cal fray themselves, relying instead upon politicians in whom they had 
little confidence to stand up for them against Beijing. It was an unhappy 
situation. Few were prepared to come out and lead. To do so would mean 
having to face the reality that Hong Kong's interests can be advanced 
only if its leaders can win the confidence of the leaders in Beijing. 
Hong Kong people will have to reconcile the competing sectional 
interests--employers like Li Ka Shing versus politicians playing for union 
and workers' votes, professionals and managers versus lower-paid white­
collar workers--over who pays what taxes and who gets what subsidies for 
health, housing, and education . After balancing their competing sectional 
interests, they face the more difficult part, to define their basic collective 
interests and fight for them, not as a separate independent state, but as a 
Hong Kong's Transition 555 
Special Administrative Region in China. This task is made doubly difficult 
because people in Hong Kong do not identify themselves as Chinese. 
Those born on the mainland tell pollsters that they are Hong Kong 
Chinese, those born in the colony call themselves Hong Kong people. 
When the SAR government proposed that the Chinese national flag be 
raised and the national anthem sung daily at all schools, 85 percent of par­
ents opposed it. On the other hand, the tenth anniversary of Tiananmen 
drew some 50,000 people to a candlelight vigil. I suspect they were fearful 
more for what could happen to them in Hong Kong than a repeat of what 
took place at Tiananmen. In contrast, when the Chinese in China protested 
with outrage at the bombing of their embassy in Belgrade in 1999, only a 
handful of Hong Kongers put on a token demonstration outside the U.S. 
consulate. 
One controver sial decision Tung made was to seek the help of the 
National People's Congress (NPC) to overturn a judgment of Hong 
Kong's court of final appeal. A provision in the Basic Law gave the right 
of entry and abode in the territory to children born in China to Hong 
Kong residents. The court held that children, including illegitimate ones, 
of Hong Kong residents and the offspring of a mainland parent who only 
subsequently acquired permanent residence in Hong Kong, had this right 
of abode. The people of Hong Kong were alarmed when the government 
disclosed that over one and a half million people would eventually be 
entitled to enter Hong Kong. 
In March 1999, the secretary for justice sought an interpretation of 
this provision of the Basic Law from the NPC standing committee in 
Beijing. The standing committee limited the right of abode to children of 
at least one parent who was a Hong Kong resident at the time of birth. 
The legal fraternity, the academics, and the media were critical, fearing 
that the government had created a precedent for the NPC to interfere in 
their judicial process. But most people supported the government's move 
and were not interested in legal niceties. 
On 21 October 1999, at the 4th anniversar y lecture of the Hong Kong 
Policy Research Institute, a think tank that does some work for the SAR 
government, I spoke of the problems of transition that had proved more 
556 From Third World to First 
difficult than anyone had expected. Hong Kong had been taken through a 
crash course on democracy and human rights by Governor Patten, sup­
ported by the U.S. and U.K. media. The aim was to etch in the minds of 
the people the principles of freedom of expression--especially of the 
press, popular elections with the widest franchise, a bill of rights to pro­
tect fundamental liberties, the rule of law, and independence of the judi­
ciary-and to hand over to China an irreversibly democracy-minded 
Hong Kong. This led many in Hong Kong to assume that the economy 
would look after itself, that if they protected democracy and human 
rights, all would be well. It turned out otherwise. 
Like every other country, Hong Kong people found their primary 
need to be their survival and well-being. People felt frustrated that the 
old system, where everybody worked hard for himself and nearly every­
body succeeded, was no longer working. But there could be no return to 
the old system. Expectations and attitudes had changed. They had to 
move forward. As long as electoral politics was responsibility -free, their 
Legco was a chamber for political posturing to win votes in the next elec­
tions. The promises of their political leaders would never be tested 
because they did not have the responsibility to deliver on their pledges. 
There were two ways forward. First, their legislators could become 
more realistic and work within the framework of a Special Administrative 
Region which was a part of China, and signal their acceptance of China's 
overriding national interests; in that case Beijing would probably allow a 
majority party to assume power after 2007 when the constitution would 
be reviewed. Or second, by a process of attrition, Beijing would wear 
down the recalcitrant politicians. Hong Kong people had up to 2007 to 
decide which way to go. The Hong Kong of old was history. Its future 
depended upon how its people acted to promote their group interests. 
In one hour of questions and answers, I stated the obvious to the audi­
ence at the international convention center- 1,200 of Hong Kong's polit­
ical, business, and media elite-that if Hong Kong became just another 
Chinese city, it was of no value to China. What made Hong Kong useful 
to China was its strong institutions, management expertise, sophisticated 
financial markets, the rule of law, the transparency of legislation and reg­
ulations, a level playing field for all, plus a cosmopolitan lifestyle with 
English as the language of business. These made Hong Kong different. 
Hong Kong's Transition 557 
Hong Kong faced two contrary pulls. To be useful to China, it must learn 
to work with Chinese officials and understand their different social, eco­
nomic, and political system and mindset. But it must never allow those 
attitudes co affect Hong Kong for otherwise it would become just another 
Chinese city. It had to retain the characteristics that made it an indispens­
able intermediary between China and the world, as during British rule. 
I expected much media criticism for stating hard facts. The response 
of the audience was warm; that of the media the next day was mild. Their 
reports caused professional groups to reflect on the choices they faced. 
They were in a situation completely different from the one Chris Patten 
had envisaged. The heavy hand of China was nowhere in evidence, but the 
heavy heart of the people of Hong Kong had immobilized them from 
moving ahead co define and work coward goals that were practical and 
achievable in their new circumstances. When British officials governed 
them, Hong Kong people did not have to act cohesively as a community. 
They were great individualists and daring entrepreneurs, willing to take 
high risks co earn big rewards for themselves and their families. Now they 
are faced with serious alternatives for their future; they must make these 
choices together as a special subgroup of the Chinese nation. 
For the present, between the aspirations of the people of Hong Kong, 
who want more democracy co protect their comfortable, prosperous way 
of life, and the expectations of China's leaders, who want a Hong Kong 
that will be useful and mischief-free, there is a wide and deep gap. Over 
the next 47 years, both sides must move toward each other and converge. 
It may not be as difficult as Hong Kong people now fear. It will be two 
more generations before they meet in one country, one system. If the 
changes that have taken place in the one generation since Chairman Mao 
died continue at the same pace, the convergence should not be too 
uncomfortable. 
35. Taiwan: The Other China 
Their isolation made the Taiwanese keen to develop ties with Singapore in 
the early years. On our part, we were anxious not to be completely depen­
dent on the Israelis for military training. Initial discussions began in 
1967. They sent a top-level representative who saw Keng Swee, then 
defense minister, and me. By December, they had submitted a proposal 
for building up an air force. We were keen to train our pilots and naval 
officers in Taiwan; the Israelis could not offer such facilities. The 
Taiwanese defense ministry was helpful, but every now and again would 
hint that when their foreign ministry got wind of their defense assistance, 
they would require some form of diplomatic recognition in return. We 
made it clear that we could not give way on this. 
When the Taiwanese did set up the "Office of the Trade Representa­
tive of the Republic of China" in Singapore in 1969, it was clearly agreed 
that this exchange of trade missions was not recognition of either state or 
government by the other. We did not want to get entangled with the 
mainland 's claim to be the sole government of China, including Taiwan. 
When the UN resolution for the admission of the People's Republic 
of China (PRC) came up, we voted for the resolution to admit China but 
abstained on the resolution to expel Taiwan. Our policy was to remain 
consistent: There was "one China," and the reunification of the PRC and 
Taiwan was an internal matter to be resolved between the two. 
The links between Taiwan's National Security Bureau and our min­
istry of defense had resulted in their lending us some Taiwanese flying 
560 From Third World to First 
instructors and several technicians and mechanics to get our aircraft 
maintenance section started. When the director of their National Security 
Bureau proposed that I visit Taiwan to meet their premier, Chiang Ching­
kuo, son of President Chiang Kai-shek, in Taipei in May 1973, I agreed. 
Premier Chiang and his Russian wife met Choo and me at the airport, 
drove with us to the Grand Hotel and showed us to our suite. The follow­
ing day, we flew with him in his VIP Boeing 707 to an air base, where he 
put on a half-hour scramble-and-take-off demonstration by an airforce 
unit. Then we drove together to Sun Moon Lake, a holiday resort, where 
we spent two days getting to know each other. 
At a dinner in Taipei, I met his foreign minister, finance minister, 
economic affairs minister, chief of general staff, and director of National 
Security Bureau, and so made the acquaintance of his top trusted aides. 
Apart from my good personal chemistry with Chiang Ching-kuo, the 
foundation of our relationship was chat we were both against commu­
nism. The Chinese Communist Party was his mortal enemy and the 
Malayan Communist Party, which was linked to the Chinese Communist 
Party, was mine. We had a common cause. 
He spoke English haltingly and his Mandarin was difficult to under­
stand because of his heavy Zhejiang accent. He understood my English, 
and together with my Mandarin we were able to do without an inter­
preter. This was crucial in establishing empathy which later developed 
into rapport. I explained the geopolitical situation in Southeast Asia, how 
Singapore was viewed as a third China, after China and Taiwan. We could 
not deny our racial, cultural, and linguistic links, but the fact that we were 
against the Malayan communists reassured our neighbors that we would 
not be a Trojan horse for a communist China. 
Our trade representative in Taipei reported later that the premier had 
a good opinion of Singapore and of me, and was pleased to have met me. 
One factor definitely helped: My daughter, then a young medical student, 
had accompanied us. She is Chinese-educated and speaks Mandarin flu­
ently. Her demeanor identified her immediately as Chinese. It made a 
crucial difference to how Chiang Ching-kuo perceived my wife, my 
daughter, and me, and helped determine relations between Singapore and 
Taiwan. A close friendship developed between Chiang and me in an 
exchange of correspondence . 
Taiwan : The Other Chin a 561 
There was a total news blackout on my visit, both in Taiwan and 
Singapore. It was at my request, to avoid international attention and con­
troversy. 
When I visited Taiwan again in December 1974, Premier Chiang 
took a personal interest in my program. He lined up navy and marine 
corps units for a ceremonial drive-past , as for a visiting head of state, all 
without publicity. He also accompanied me to view his country's prog­
ress, including major construction works like the East-West Highway 
built through difficult mountain terrain. 
During this second visit, I broached the subject of training our armed 
forces in Taiwan, because of Singapore 's limited space. We had discussed 
it with his military staff several months earlier. He was sympathetic. By 
April 1975, we had reached agreement for Singapore Armed Forces train­
ing in Taiwan under the code name "Exercise Starlight. " Valid initially 
for one year, it allowed us to train infantry, artillery, armor, and com­
mando units, dispersed all over Taiwan in areas used by their equivalent 
forces. They charged us only for what we consumed and no more. 
Chiang had a fair, round face, wore t_hick horn-rimmed glasses, and 
had a fairly rotund figure. He was calm and quiet, with a soft voice. He 
did not pretend to be an intellectual but had a practical mind and keen 
social intelligence. He was a good judge of character and surrounded him­
self with trustworthy people who would give him honest advice even 
when unwelcome. When he spoke, it was after careful reflection because 
he was not given to casual commitments. He could not travel freely 
abroad and found me an additional source of information on develop­
ments in America and the wider world. He would ask keen, searching 
questions on changes in the geopolitical scene. Until he became infirm in 
the mid-1980s, Chiang would accompany me around Taiwan on each of 
my visits of three to four days. In a free-ranging exchange, he would test 
on me his assessments and views of political events formed from reading 
reports. He felt his international isolation keenly. 
From 1973 to 1990, I visited Taiwan once or twice a year, nearly 
always stopping over in Hong Kong. It was instructive and inspiring to 
see the economic and social progress of the Chinese in Taiwan, with 8 to 
10 percent annual growth. From a low-wage, labor-intensive economy 
based on agriculture and manufacture of textiles, garments, and sports 
562 From Third World to First 
shoes, they moved steadily upmarket. At first, they pirated expensive 
medical, legal, and other textbooks which they sold at ridiculously low 
prices. By the 1980s, they were printing them under license on quality 
paper and in hard covers. By the 1990s, they were making computer 
chips, motherboards, PCs, laptops, and other high-tech products. I had 
observed a similar upgrading of the economy and living standards in 
Hong Kong. The rapid progress of these two maritime Chinese commu­
nities gave me great encouragement. I picked up useful pointers. If they 
could make it, so could Singapore. 
The Chinese in Taiwan, without the straitjacket of communism and a 
centrally planned economy, were racing ahead. Taiwan, like Hong Kong, 
had minimal welfare. This was to change with the introduction of popular 
elections in the early 1990s. Their opposition in the legislature pressed 
for and got the government to implement medical, pension, and other 
social security benefits, so the budget ran into deficit. With a rambunc­
tious opposition in the legislature, the government in the 1990s had diffi­
culty increasing taxes to balance the budget. Fortunately , so far Taiwanese 
workers remain better motivated than their Western counterparts. 
Chiang and his ministers were proudest of their advances in education. 
Every student was educated at least to junior middle school, nine years, 
and by the 1990s some 30 percent were university graduates. Their finance 
minister, K. T. Li, lamented the brain drain. From the 1960s, out of some 
4,500 graduate students who went to America for PhDs every year, only 
500 would return. As Taiwan rose in the economic league tables, Li set out 
to attract some of their best to return, those who had worked in top 
research laboratories and in the big electronic multinationals. He built a 
science park near Taipei and provided them with cheap loans to start their 
businesses in semiconductors. Their computer industry took off. These 
people had built up networks with Americans in the computer industry 
and acquired the knowledge and expertise that enabled them to keep 
abreast of the latest developments and to market their products. They were 
supported by locally educated Taiwanese engineers and technicians. 
The 2 to 3 million mainlanders who came over with General Chiang Kai­
shek's forces had included a thick layer of intellectuals, administrators, 
Taiwan: The Other China 563 
scholars, and entrepreneurs. They were the catalyst that transformed 
Taiwan into an economic powerhouse . 
However, the mainlander elite in Taiwan knew they were in a diffi­
cult position in the long term. They were a minority of about 10 percent. 
Gradually but inexorably, both the bureaucracy and the officer corps of 
the armed forces, originally manned by mainlanders or their children, 
came to have increasing numbers of Taiwanese. It was only a matter of 
time before the Taiwanese, 90 percent of the population, swung their 
political weight. Chiang and his senior aides recognized this. They were 
selecting from among the Taiwanese those they considered the most reli­
able and dependable-people who would continue their policy to stand 
firm against the communists on the mainland, yet never go for an inde­
pendent, separate Taiwan, which was anathema to the mainlanders. 
By the mid-1980s, a younger generation of educated Taiwanese had 
risen through the ranks of officialdom. We changed our trade representa­
tive, who was from Chiang's own province of Zhejiang, to one who could 
speak the local Min-nan dialect, a subdialect of Fujian province. We could 
see a different Taiwan emerging. We had to know the Taiwanese in the 
bureaucracy associated with the Kuomintang (KMT), but steered clear of 
Taiwanese dissidents who wanted independence. Their organizations were 
illegal, and several were imprisoned for sedition. 
In the mid-1980s, I noticed Chiang's health had declined markedly. 
He could no longer accompany me around Taiwan. From our conversa­
tions, I gathered he was being pressed by the U.S. media and Congress to 
democratize the political system. Chiang lifted martial law and began this 
process. His son Hsiao-wu, their trade representative in Singapore, had 
filled me in on his father's thinking. I told Chiang that to ensure Taiwan's 
security he had to retain the support not only of President Reagan, but 
also of the U.S. media and Congress because Reagan needed the backing 
of both. Later, Chiang allowed the unofficial opposition, which had been 
illegal, to participate in elections for the Legislative Yuan. 
Chiang died in January 1988. He had enjoyed enormous domestic 
prestige which helped to manage the forces unleashed by his recent lifting 
of martial law. I attended his funeral. Also present to pay their respects 
were many Japanese and American leaders, former prime ministers and 
high office holders, but no current incumbents. It was a traditional 
564 From Third World to First 
Chinese-style funeral. His body was taken to a temporary resting place 
outside Taipei, to be kept, like his father Generalissimo Chiang Kai­
shek's, for eventual interment in their county in Zhejiang province, south 
of Shanghai. 
Vice President Lee Teng-hui then took over. I had met him first as mayor 
of Taipei, then as the governor of Taiwan province. Occasional ly, we 
played golf. He was competent , industrious, and deferential to his superi­
ors, especially the president and the mainlander ministers. He was then a 
friendly self-effacing official, tall, with greying hair, thick glasses, and a 
wide smile. Before Chiang Ching-kuo chose him as vice president in 
1984, several other native Taiwanese KMT leaders had been considered 
but thought less suitable. I assumed Chiang must have been absolutely 
satisfied that he was reliable and could be trusted to continue Chiang's 
policies never to allow an independent Taiwan. 
For a few years President Lee Teng-hui continued the KMT's settled 
policy of one China and no independent Taiwan. He set out to win over 
enough of the old guard and a few of the young guard mainlanders in the 
KMT to take complete control of the party. All those in key positions 
who gave contrary views or unwelcome advice were soon removed, includ­
ing Hau Pei-tsun, the premier, and Fredrick Chien Fu, his foreign minis­
ter who had advised against his visit to America in 1995. Lee rapidly 
democratized the system to place more Taiwanese in key appointments 
and strengthen his hold on the KMT and the country. The KMT old 
guard had earlier told me they expected and accepted the inevitability of 
this. But they did not know how swiftly President Lee would shift politi­
cal power to the 90 percent majority through popular elections to the 
national assembly and Legislative Yuan. He transformed the KMT itself 
until eventually many left it to form the New Party, a move which seri­
ously weakened the KMT's grip on power. 
Once he had consolidated his position, President Lee began to express 
his feelings in words which caused the leaders in Beijing to conclude that he 
wanted to keep Taiwan separate from China for as long as possible. In 1992, 
President Lee announced his terms for reunification. He defined "one China" 
as the Republic of China, not the People's Republic of China. National 
Taiwan : The Other China 565 
reunification would only be achieved under a "free, prosperous and demo­
cratic China"-in other words, communist China must first become as 
democratic as Taiwan. I did not know then that this was intended as a fixed, 
unbridgeable position, not a starting point for negotiations. 
In April 1994, President Lee gave an interview to Ryotaro Shiba, a 
well-known Japanese journalist. It was published in a Japanese magazine 
and never denied. In it, he said the KMT was a party of outsiders , that the 
Taiwanese people had suffered greatly under the occupation of outsiders, 
which included the KMT government , and that "Difficulties will lie 
ahead of Moses and his people .... 'Exodus' may be a kind of fit conclu­
sion." For a president of Taiwan to talk of Moses leading his people to the 
Promised Land was a statement China could not ignore. 
Native Taiwanese harbored a deep grievance against the mainlanders for 
the "2-28" incident. Around 28 February 1947, thousands of native 
Taiwanese were killed by Nationalist troops for expressing their resent­
ment against the mainlanders who behaved not as liberators but as over­
lords. All public reference to this tragedy was suppressed, but it lived on 
in the memory of the local population and broke into the open when a 
Taiwanese became president. To his credit, President Lee kept in check 
any attempt to settle past scores. 
Popular elections tend to reopen these old wounds and accentuate the 
divide between native Taiwanese and mainlanders. To appeal to the 90 
percent majority, politicians emphasize their indigenous identity. They 
campaign in the local Min-nan dialect and ridicule mainlander opponents 
for their inability to speak the language. Some even question the alle­
giance of mainlanders to Taiwan. 
Older mainlander leaders felt hurt by these divisive attacks. 
Mainlander scholars had helped build universities and nurtured many 
able native Taiwanese. Outstanding mainlander leaders like Premiers Y. S. 
Sun and Yu Kuo-hwa and Finance Minister K. T. Li had crafted the poli­
cies that transformed Taiwan from an agricultural into an industrial econ­
omy. They laid the foundation for Taiwan's considerable success. 
A more grievous result of electioneering has been the growing 
involvement of triads (Chinese mafia or secret societies). The KMT's triad 
566 From Third World to First 
links date from prewar Shanghai days, when General Chiang Kai-shek 
used them to fight the communists. They accompanied him to Taiwan. A 
Taiwanese mafia has flourished and taken root. As long as elections did 
not lead to real power, the government was able to control them. 
When the political system opened up in the late 1980s and elections 
became contests for real power, the triads soon discovered that they could 
get themselves elected into positions of power. By 1996, when 10 percent 
of the national and 30 percent of the local legislatures were secret society 
members, they were a political force. Corruption and vote buying have 
become entrenched. Once in office, they have to recoup their expenditure. 
A free press has not been able to check corruption ("black gold") or 
suppress the triads which it has compared to the Sicilian mafia. They have 
become so powerful that when a notorious triad leader was killed by a 
rival gang in 1996, the secretary-general of the office of President Lee 
Teng-hui paid public homage by sending a traditional funeral scroll to 
win over his followers. The deputy legislative speaker and other promi­
nent legislators were present at the funeral, as were several opposition lead­
ers. The mafia has penetrated the construction industry, agricultural co­
operatives, and even the baseball league. It has muscled its way into 
annual general meetings of listed companies and cash-rich temple com­
mittees, and even started recruiting members in schools. 
In June 2000, two weeks after his appointment, the first non-KMT 
Justice Minister, Chen Ding-nan, said: "In the East Asia region, Taiwan 
has the most serious cases of corruption and has failed to do anything 
about it for the past 50 years. Lee Teng-hui is the source of Taiwan's black­
gold politics. He knew where it was and did little more than talk about 
the need to combat it. That was the reason why former justice ministers 
were forced to step down because they took Mr. Lee's words to heart and 
tried to clean up. The atmosphere, the culture, the people-it can easily 
influence judges and police and even the legislative officials. We need 
them to take responsibili ty." 
I received President Lee in Singapore in 1989, the first visit by a 
Taiwanese president to Southeast Asia. I extended him all the personal 
courtesies due to a visiting head of state. But although we had not then 
Taiwan: The Other China 567 
established diplomatic relations with the PRC, I decided the protocol 
level would not be that for a head of state. There were no flags, no guard 
of honor, no ceremonial trappings of a state visit. In all public statements, 
we referred to him as President Lee "from Taiwan," not "of Taiwan." 
Nevertheless , that visit raised his political profile in the region. 
Because I had acted as a channel for messages between the two sides, 
the PRC and Taiwan chose Singapore as the venue for their first-ever 
talks, in April 1993. The Chinese named it "Wang-Koo Talks" after the 
surnames of the leaders who officially represented "unofficial" organiza­
tions on both sides. I met both delegation leaders separately and knew 
that they were entrusted by their respective presidents with different 
agendas. Koo Chen-fu, representing Taiwan, wanted to settle only techni­
cal matters like authentication of documents and the verification of lost 
registered mail; his president did not want any discussions on liberaliza­
tion of trade, let alone reunification. Wang Daohan wanted these prelimi­
naries to lead to substantive discussions on reunification. As expected, the 
talks did not improve relations. 
President Lee is a voracious reader with an enormous capacity for 
absorbing information. He had been educated in Japanese schools in 
Taiwan when it was Formosa, a Japanese colony. During the war, he was 
among the few Taiwanese chosen to be educated in Japanese universities, 
in his case Kyoto Imperial University, second in prestige only to Tokyo 
Imperial University. He returned to Taiwan after the war to complete his 
university education in Taipei. Later, he went on to America for two 
stints, the second of which was in Cornell where he did a PhD in agricul­
tural economics. 
By preference, he proudly told me, he read four top Japanese papers 
every day and watched NHK TV by satellite from Tokyo. Even for books, 
he preferred to read Japanese translations rather than the English origi­
nals because he found them easier reading. Steeped as he was in Japanese 
history and culture, he did not think much of the mainland, either its his­
tory and culture or its present communist leaders, viewing them with the 
eyes of a Japanese-tra ined elite. He had a disdain for the communist lead­
ers, and publicly called them "blockheads," "stupid," and "damaged 
brains." The Chinese leaders never returned these compliments, but I felt 
sure some desk officer in Beijing dutifully recorded them. 
568 From Third World to First 
I found him self-confident , well-read, and well-briefed on every sub­
ject that interested him. But because of Taiwan's isolation, he could not 
understand why world leaders did not sympathize with Taiwan as the 
Japanese did. He considered Japan's sympathy and support for Taiwan of 
great importance. He also believed that if he followed the prescriptions of 
American liberals and the U.S. Congress for democracy and human rights, 
the United Scates would defend him against communise China. 
I could not understand President Lee's position. An old friend of his 
explained that his Japanese training had imbued him with the bushido 
spirit of the Japanese warrior, and he considered it his mission co lead the 
people of Taiwan co the "promised land." Lee, chis friend added, was also a 
devout Christian who would do God's will at all coses, fired by the 
bushido spirit. 
In June 1995, after powerful lobbying, President Lee got the U.S. 
Congress co pass a unanimous resolution co give him a visa co visit 
Cornell, his alma macer. That visit and the speech he made at Cornell had 
a far graver impact than the U.S. Congress expected. I had feared some 
reaction, but did not realize the depth of China's distrust of President Lee 
and the implications they read into the U.S. president's decision co allow 
the visit. Lacer chat year, in October, I asked Premier Li Peng why he was 
so convinced chat Lee Teng-hui wanted independence. Li Peng said they 
had watched the whole video recording of Lee Teng-hui's speech at 
Cornell. Lee did not refer at all co one China, but emphasized Taiwan, and 
called it the Republic of China on Taiwan. This conviction led in March 
1996 to the most serious confrontation between the two sides since the 
1958 crisis in Quemoy. The Chinese deployed troops and conducted mili­
tary exercises in Fujian province opposite Taiwan, and fired missiles that 
landed in waters near important seaports on Taiwan's west coast. 
To moderate the situation, on 3 March 1996, I made chis plea, 
"China's leaders have referred to me as an old friend. I am an older friend 
of Taiwan. If either one is damaged, Singapore will suffer a loss. If both 
are damaged, Singapore's loss will be doubled. Singapore benefits when 
both prosper, when both co-operate and help each other prosper." Vice 
Premier Qian Qichen, China's foreign minister, at a press conference said 
this was an internal matter, that although I knew more about Taiwan than 
most outsiders , this was not a matter chat involved outsiders. This gentle 
Taiwan : The Other Chin a 569 
rebuff did not surprise me as it was in keeping with their basic stand that 
this was an internal "Chinese" problem to be resolved directly between 
the leaders on both sides. 
Meanwhile, President Lee began to deemphasize Taiwan's Chineseness. 
From the end of the war in 1945 until the death of Chiang Ching-kuo in 
1988, their schools and universities taught in the national language 
(Mandarin). Students learned the history and geography of mainland China 
of which Taiwan was a province. Now, schools teach more of the history 
and geography of Taiwan, and less of China. As early as 1989, soon after 
Chiang died, I could sense the embarrassment of Premier Yu Kuo-hwa, a 
mainlander, who accompanied me on a visit to Taitung, an old Japanese 
hot spring resort. After dinner, in a karaoke session, the local Taiwanese 
ministers sang Minnan songs, which Yu did not understand. 
During his 12 years as president, Lee voiced separatist sentiments 
that had lain dormant in Taiwan. He underestimated the will of the lead­
ers and people of the Chinese mainland to keep Taiwan firmly within its 
fold. Lee's policies could only prevail with the support of the United 
States. By acting as though such support would be forthcoming for all 
time, he led the people of Taiwan to believe that they did not need to 
negotiate seriously on Taiwan's future with China's leaders. His contribu­
tion to Taiwan's future has been to turn the reunification issue into the 
most important item on Beijing's national agenda. 
China's leaders closely watched the election campaign for the next 
president in March 2000. They were concerned with the rising support 
for Chen Shui-bian, candidate of the Democratic Progressive Party. Native 
Taiwanese nationalists who formed this party had long fought for 
Taiwan's independence and been imprisoned and punished by the KMT 
government under President Chiang Kai-shek and his son, President 
Chiang Ching-kuo. On February 22, 2000, Beijing media published a 
State Council white paper to warn that if Taiwan refused to discuss reuni­
fication indefinitely , China would have to use force. It was directed at 
Chen. On March 15, three days before the vote, Premier Zhu Rongji in a 
live television press conference warned the Taiwanese that China would 
shed blood to protect its territory. 
Chen Shui-bian won with less than 40 percent of the vote against 
independent candidate James Soong, with 36 percent. The KMT candi-
570 From Third World to First 
date Lien Chan, the incumbent vice president, lost badly. President Lee 
Teng-hui was seen to have abandoned Lien Chan by a perfunctory cam­
paign speech in Lien's support. Several of Lee's closest friends endorsed 
Chen. This added to the distrust of China's leaders for Chen. Beijing said 
it would wait and see, listen to what Chen would say and watch what he 
would do. Chen made conciliatory statements after he was declared the 
winner but none of the statements committed him to eventual reunifica­
tion. President Jiang Zemin said talks could only resume under the prin­
ciple of One China. Chen said One China could be an item for discussion. 
At his inauguration on 20 May, Chen said "both sides possess enough wis­
dom and creativity to jointly deal with the question of a future 'One­
China.' " He gave no cause for any precipitate action against Taiwan, but 
did not say enough to shake the mainland leaders' beliefs that he would 
continue the "Lee Teng-hui era, without Lee Teng-hui." Two hours after 
the speech, the mainland said he lacked sincerity. Beijing will probably 
wait until after they know in November 2000 who will be the next U.S. 
president before deciding on their course of action. The stage may be set 
for a dramatic face-off. If the new president equivocates and does not 
agree to accept that Taiwan and the mainland are parts of one China, how­
ever defined, the situation will become volatile. No Chinese leader can 
survive if he is seen to "lose Taiwan.'' 
The new president has two choices: carry on where Lee Teng-hui left 
off, which means conflict, or close that chapter and start a new one on a 
realistic basis. Taiwan has been separated from the mainland for over a 
hundred years since 1895. No Chinese in Taiwan relishes being reab­
sorbed into this huge mass of 1.2 billion. They prefer their different way 
of government, lifestyle, and higher standard of living, which they have 
worked hard to achieve. Even the mainlanders who have been in Taiwan 
since 1949 and support reunification, do not want it in the near future. 
The United States may be able to stop China from using force for 
another 20 to 30 years. Within that time, China is likely to develop the 
military capability to control the straits. It may be wiser, before the mili­
tary balance shifts to the mainland, to negotiate the terms for an eventual, 
not an immediate, reunification. 
Assume that the worst has happened, that the mainland has used 
force and caused the United States to react and decisively defeat the PLA 
Taiwan: The Other China 571 
by superior technology. "Is that the end of the story?" I asked three 
American think-tankers soon after the elections in Taiwan. One replied, 
"That is the beginning of the story." He had thought through the prob­
lem. If superior U.S. technology frustrates them, it is not difficult to 
imagine 1,200 million Chinese being fired by one powerful urge, to show 
Americans they are not cowards and inferior. 
For President Chen Shui-bian to continue Lee Teng-hui's policy of cre­
ating a separate and distinct Taiwanese national identity will confirm 
Beijing's suspicions that he has set Taiwan's course of independence. This 
will increase the danger of a precipitate solution to the issue of reunifi­
cation. If Taiwan becomes an independent nation, Lee Teng-hui will go 
down in Taiwan's history as a hero. If Taiwan is reunited with the main­
land by force, history will not be so kind to a man who brought unneces­
sary pain and suffering on the Chinese people in Taiwan. 
The Chinese people on both sides of the straits can lessen their prob­
lems by establishing easier relations over the years. If there is to be a 
peaceful reunification, there has to be a gradual blurring, not an accentua­
tion of the differences that at present divide and distinguish the two soci­
eties. Both need time to work and narrow the social, economic, and polit­
ical gap. The sense of belonging to the Chinese nation is weaker in Taiwan 
than in Hong Kong. The mainland has the weight and girth to accept this 
and adopt an open and magnanimous approach to help this process of rec­
onciliation. Reunification achieved by force will leave indelible scars. On 
the other hand, Taiwan's leaders have the responsibility not to move 
toward independence or deliberately widen the differences between the 
two societies. 
36. China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 
No foreign country other than Britain has had a greater influence on 
Singapore 's political development than China, the ancestral homeland of 
three-quarters of our people. The Singapore-China relationship has been 
long, complex, and unequal. From the founding of Singapore in 1819 
until 1867, Qing dynasty China did not recognize the existence of the 
overseas Chinese. This changed in the 1870s when China set up con­
sulates in Nanyang (the South Seas), then under the colonial control of the 
British, French, and Dutch. These consulates, including one in Singapore, 
were intended not so much to protect the Chinese as to harness their loy­
alty to China by promoting Chinese culture and education, and to obtain 
their financial support. 
In the 1920s, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) sent an agent to 
Singapore to build up a communist movement in Nanyang. When the com­
munists held a secret meeting in Singapore in 1930 to found the Malayan 
Communist Party (MCP), Ho Chi Minh, the legendary Vietnamese commu­
nist leader, was present. The rivalries and conflicts between the Kuomintang 
Nationalist Party (KMT) and the CCP in China extended to their support­
ers in Singapore and Malaya. During the war both the KMT and CCP fought 
against the Japanese in China. Because of their stronger anti-Japanese resis­
tance activities, the CCP enjoyed greater support from Chinese workers and 
farmers. 
The rise of communist China in 1949 inspired an intense patriotic pride 
that surged through the Chinese-educated community in anticipation of the 
574 From Third World to First 
emergence of a powerful China, one that would banish their sense of humil­
iation and subjugation at the hands of the British and other Europeans. On 
the other hand, it aroused deep-seated fears among Malays, Indians, English­
educated Chinese, and a minority of the Chinese-educated who supported the 
KMT. In 1949, both the KMT and the CCP were proscribed in Singapore, 
but the division of the community between the two remained. 
The People's Republic of China (PRC) aimed to increase the loyalty of 
che overseas Chinese to Beijing. In 1949, it formed the Overseas Chinese 
Affairs Commission and began radio broadcasts. le supported Chinese 
education overseas and encouraged the Nanyang Chinese to send home to 
China their sons for education and remittances for their relatives. It also 
appealed co qualified doctors, engineers, and teachers co return and help 
rebuild the motherland. It was a subversive challenge to the colonial gov­
ernments and to the newly independent governments of Southeast Asia in 
Indonesia and, later, Malaya. Radio Beijing, the People's Daily, and the 
Beijing Review regularly denounced Malaysia as a neocolonialist plot to 
persecute people of Chinese descent. 
The Tunku and other Malay leaders feared Beijing's influence over the 
MCP and over the bulk of their Chinese-speaking population. When in 
1963 Zhou Enlai wrote to me a letter similar to that addressed to many 
other heads of government, calling for the removal and destruction of 
nuclear weapons, I gave him a bland reply chat such a solution would be 
welcomed by all. This was while we were a self-governing colony and not 
a state in Malaysia. When my letter to Zhou was made public by China in 
1964, after we were in Malaysia, the Tunku publicly reprimanded me for 
having "entered into direct correspondence with a government which 
Malaysia does not recognise and which has proved by word and deed co be 
hostile to Malaysia." 
In January 1965, Premier Zhou Enlai had condemned the formation of 
Malaysia in a speech to an Indonesian delegation in Beijing. After indepen­
dence, we had no diplomatic contact with the PRC. Indeed, up to 1970, 
Beijing did not recognize the existence of an independent Singapore. PRC 
broadcasts and publications referred to Singapore as "a part of Malaya." 
Malaysia, too, did not exist because it was "a neocolonialist plot." Their pro­
paganda regularly condemned "Singapore authorities" for their "criminal 
armed suppression of Singapore people." In 1966, the All China Federation 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 575 
of Trade Unions sent a telegram to left-wing unions in Singapore expressing 
the indignation of Chinese workers at the "barbarous acts of suppression of 
the workers perpetrated by the Singapore authorities who are tailing behind 
U.S. and British imperialism. " I was attacked by name in 1968 when Radio 
Beijing reported Lee Kuan Yew as a "running dog of U.S. and British impe­
rialism." 
When the Cultural Revolution in China was at its height, we used to 
confiscate large quantities of Chinese stamps bearing "Thoughts of Mao" 
imported by some Chinese-language bookshops, and also thousands of 
copies of Mao's little red book brought in by Chinese seamen who wanted 
to distribute them. Even the Singapore branch of the Bank of China 
joined in this madness and gave out Cultural Revolution propaganda 
pamphlets to customers at their counters. We arrested and prosecutt:d our 
own citizens who indulged in this frenzy, but left Chinese nationals alone 
to keep open the trade with China. 
In late 1970, Beijing quietly changed its stance toward Singapore. In 
those capitals where we were represented, our heads of mission were 
invited to China's national day receptions. China's priority then was to get 
as many governments as possible to close ranks against the Soviet Union 
and check the expansion of its influence into Southeast Asia. The Soviet 
intervention in Czechoslovakia in 1968 and border clashes between 
Chinese and Russian forces across the Amur River in 1969 had rendered 
China's revolutionary antics dangerous. They were weakening China's 
capability to resist Soviet aggression. 
By 1971, China stopped public attacks on the Singapore government. 
That year, the Bank of China's branch in Singapore hoisted the Singapore 
flag on our national day, something it had not done before. Trade between 
our two countries had always been in their favor. Singapore then was 
China's second biggest foreign exchange earner after Hong Kong. We 
were not concerned over this adverse balance of trade because we were an 
entrepot economy. But we required all Singapore Chinese firms that dealt 
with China to be registered with a government agency that controlled 
trade with communist countries. Thus, a franchise from the Chinese side 
had to be matched with a permit from the Singapore government. 
The first contact came through "ping-pong diplomacy" in 1971. We 
allowed a Singapore ping-pong team to accept an invitation to play at the 
576 From Third World to First 
Afro-Asia Table Tennis Friendship Games in Beijing. A few months later, 
a second delegation went for the Asian Table Tennis Union. We then 
accepted a Chinese offer to send their ping-pong team for a friendly visit 
to Singapore the following year, a few months after President Nixon had 
been to China. We had refused two previous offers, one of a troupe of 
acrobats, the other a Beijing trade mission. Raja as foreign minister 
thought a third rebuff would be unnecessarily offensive. During the 
friendly ping-pong matches I was angered when a large part of the audi­
ence jeered at the home team and shouted slogans in praise of Mao. I pub­
licly castigated these infantile left-wingers as Singapore's "mini-Maos ." 
The PRC had also altered its position toward the overseas Chinese. 
Malaysian Prime Minister Razak had sent a delegation to Beijing in May 
1974, a year before the fall of Saigon. After its return, the Malaysian gov­
ernment sent us an aide-memoire on their discussions. The leader of their 
delegation had posed two questions to Premier Zhou Enlai: first, on their 
policy toward the overseas Chinese; second, on their support for the MCP. 
Zhou replied that the term "overseas Chinese" was not accurate as many 
had already taken up citizenship of their countries of residence. They were 
conservative by nature and had become a great problem in the PRC's rela­
tions with these countries. The "new China" had a new revolutionary pol­
icy toward the "so-called overseas Chinese." It had dissolved the Overseas 
Chinese Affairs Commission to discourage Chinese overseas from thinking 
of returning to China. China would not interfere if any country with a 
Chinese population abolished Chinese newspapers and Chinese schools. 
As for the MCP, the question had to be "viewed from an historical per­
spective." The PRC had always supported "liberation movements" to 
free themselves from colonial oppression. But only support from inside 
the country, and not support from the PRC, could make such a move­
ment succeed. Therefore, if countries of Southeast Asia and China had a 
forward-looking view, relations could be improved and they could have 
diplomatic relations. 
Since 1969, China had required overseas Chinese who visited China 
to apply for visas, where previously they had been allowed free entry. They 
had decided it was not possible to have their cake and eat it. If they 
wanted normal diplomatic relations with the countries of Southeast Asia 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 577 
that had Chinese populations, they had to give up their principle of jus 
sanguinis (the law of the blood), that any person descended from a 
Chinese father was automaticall y a Chinese national. 
In October 1971, our permanent representative at the United Nations, 
when voting for the admission of the PRC, said, "There is one China and 
that Taiwan is a part of China .... It follows therefore that the Taiwan 
question is an internal matter to be settled by the Chinese peoples includ­
ing those of Taiwan." But we still did not have official exchanges with 
the PRC. After the Malaysian government established relations with the 
PRC in May 1974, I thought it was time for Singapore to initiate formal 
contacts with the PRC government. I agreed to Raja's visiting China in 
March 1975. 
We believed that uppermost in Chinese minds was Singapore's rela­
tions with their bitter adversary, the Soviet Union. Qiao Guanhua , the 
Chinese deputy foreign minister, had met Raja in October 1974 at the 
UN, and asked about Russian ships repaired in Singapore. Raja explained 
that we did not discriminate against any country that wanted to have its 
ships repaired; we were an open port. But he assured Qiao that we would 
not allow Singapore to be used for subversive activities against neighbor­
ing countries, and our neighbors included China. Raja repeated this posi­
tion to Zhou Enlai when they met, adding that as our neighbors were 
hypersensitive over Singapore's Chinese majority, we would establish 
diplomatic relations with China only after Indonesia had done so. We had 
to avoid any suspicion that Singapore was influenced by kinship ties with 
China. Premier Zhou said China respected Singapore as an independent 
state. We had a more compelling reason which they might have guessed; 
we wanted to first weed out communist subversives in our Chinese mid­
dle schools and Nanyang University. We also needed time to reduce the 
number of those born in China and vulnerable to chauvinist appeals who 
were in positions of influence in various associations including the 
Chinese Chamber of Commerce. We had seen how susceptible the China­
born were to pulls of sentiment and blood. 
Premier Zhou sent me an invitation to visit China through Thailand' s 
Premier Kukrit Pramoj who visited Beijing in June 1975. I did not 
respond. In September 1975, when I was visiting the Shah in Teheran, his 
578 From Third World to First 
prime minister, Hoveida, also conveyed Premier Zhou's invitation to me, 
adding that time was short. I took this to mean that I should come soon if 
we were to meet. There had been numerous press reports of Zhou being in 
hospital for long periods. I decided to go. But before we could settle on a 
date in May 1976, Zhou died. We announced the proposed visit in mid­
April. A few days later Raja restated the government's position, that 
Singapore would be the last Asean country to exchange diplomatic repre­
sentations with China. 
This trip to China was my most thoroughly discussed and prepared 
foreign visit. We knew from other delegations that the Chinese were sys­
tematic and would probe every member of the delegation for information. 
We settled a common line on key issues for all senior members of my del­
egation. First, the question of recognition and diplomatic relations: We 
could not change our basic position, that we would move only after 
Indonesia had established relations; we had to be the last in Asean. 
Second, Soviet activities in Singapore: We would not allow the Soviet 
Union to engage in any anti-China activity, but as a free economy we had 
allowed the Soviets to open a branch of their Moscow Narodny Bank to 
conduct trade relations. The Chinese feared the Russians were buying the 
support of Chinese business leaders. We decided to assure the Chinese 
that we did not view a strong China with suspicion. We were neither pro­
Soviet Union nor pro-China. We were pro-West because that was in the 
interest of Singapore and its neighbors. We were fully aware of Soviet 
activities in Singapore and the region and would keep such activities 
under close watch. 
We expected them to push for liaison offices or trade representatives 
and decided to make it clear that this had to wait until they had estab­
lished similar offices in Jakarta. However, we would concede one PRC 
representative of the Bank of China to work in its Singapore branch. 
While we wanted to encourage them to expand their trade with Singa­
pore and were willing to allow relatively innocuous cultural and sports 
exchanges like ping-pong and basketball teams or acrobatic troupes, we 
did not want to hold out any false hopes for more; nor did we wish to 
antagonize the Soviet Union. On Taiwan, we would reaffirm our policy of 
recognizing only one China, namely the PRC. Most important of all, as 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 579 
we expected them to characterize Singapore as a "kinsman country," we 
decided to emphasize our distinctiveness and separateness from them. 
I asked for a lengthy visit to see as much of China as possible. They 
fixed it for 10-23 May 1976. To make doubly sure that no one doubted 
we were not going in as kinsmen Chinese, we had in our 17-member del­
egation a Jaffna Tamil foreign minister (Rajaratnam) and a Malay parlia­
mentary secretary (Ahmad Mattar), who would be present at all meetings, 
which would be conducted in English. 
There was no direct flight from Singapore to Beijing. We flew to 
Hong Kong, took the train to Lo Wu at the border with China, and 
walked across the frontier to board the Chinese special train for Canton. 
That afternoon we were flown in their British-built Trident to Beijing 
where a welcome ceremony awaited us at the airport. I inspected a guard 
of honor mounted by units of the People's Liberation Army, the navy, and 
the air force after the PLA band played the Singapore and Chinese 
national anthems. Then some 2,000 schoolgirls in colorful costumes 
waved Singapore and Chinese paper flags and flowers, chanting "Huan 
ying, huan ying" (welcome, welcome) and "Re lie huan ying, Re lie huan 
ying" (warmly welcome, warmly welcome). There was a large banner in 
Chinese which read jian jue zhi chi xin jia po ren (resolutely support the 
people of Singapore). They did not express support for the government of 
Singapore. Unlike their usual reception for heads of government of coun­
tries with whom they had diplomatic relations, there was no welcoming 
editorial in the People's Dail y and the diplomatic corps were not at the air­
port to greet me. Otherwise, they laid on full protocol honors for my visit. 
Premier Zhou had died that January. Deng Xiaoping had been rusti­
cated and was not in Beijing. I was received by Hua Guofeng. He looked 
and acted like the tough chief of security of a communist country that he 
had been. Our public positions were made at the formal state banquet on 
the night of 11 May. He complimented us: "In international affairs, Sing­
apore opposes hegemonism and power politics, stands for peace and neu­
trality of Southeast Asia, actively develops relations with other Third 
World countries and has contributed positively to promoting economic 
exchanges and trade among nations." Then he read out his standard de­
nunciation against superpower hegemony , referring indirectly but obvi-
580 From Third World to First 
ously to the Soviets who were carrying out infiltration and expansion in 
Southeast Asia after the American withdrawal from Vietnam. 
I replied, "History brought together Chinese, Malays and Indians in 
Singapore. We are proud of our own heritage. Sharing a common experi­
ence, we are developing a distinctive way of life. By geography, our future 
will be more closely interlinked with those of our neighbours in Southeast 
Asia." 
We had three formal meetings for a total of seven hours. At the first 
three-hour meeting in the Great Hall of the People on 11 May, Hua 
Guofeng invited me to speak first. I spelled out the basic facts concerning 
Singapore. Malaysia and Indonesia suspected Singapore of being pro­
China because we were 7 5 percent Chinese. The Americans and Russians 
were also suspicious. Singapore had its work cut out not to be seen in 
these simplistic terms-that because we had a Chinese majority we must 
therefore be pro-China. The problem was that there were sections of our 
Chinese who were chauvinistic, the old generation born in China, but 
they were an aging and diminishing group. In addition there was a 
younger generation, completely Chinese-educated, who were unable to 
master the English language and unable to get good jobs; although not as 
emotionally attached co the fatherland as chose born in China, they 
tended co be pro-China, and some of chem pro-commun ise. We had co 
prevent chem from doing Singapore harm. 
Singapore would not be anti-China, I continued. The stronger China 
became, the better and more equal the balance between the United States, 
the Soviet Union, and China. This would be safer for che world and for 
Singapore. If China concluded chat an independent Singapore was not 
against China's interest, then many of the differences between our two 
countries would diminish. On the ocher hand, if they believed that an 
independent Singapore was against its interest or if China therefore 
wanted co help install a communise government, then disagreements were 
bound co increase. 
Instead of answering my points, Hua launched into his script, an 
analysis of the "Three Worlds" which was then China's standard exposi­
tion of the international situation. It was couched in strong revolutionary 
language. The current international situation would speed up the decline 
of the superpowers and promote the awakening of the Third World. The 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 581 
United States and the Soviet Union belonged to the First World, develop­
ing countries in Asia, Africa, Latin America, and other parts of the world 
(China and Singapore included) belonged to the Third World, and the 
developed countries were the Second World. The United States and the 
Soviet Union were competing for world hegemony. The United States was 
overstretched and the Russians wanted to dominate the world. As long as 
they both continued this contest, the world was heading for another war. 
All countries should therefore be prepared for such an eventuality . 
However, China viewed both the United States and Russia as "paper 
tigers"; their strength did not match their ambitions. In carrying out 
their policy of expansionism and aggression the Russians were bound to 
be defeated. China was concerned that one wolf (U.S.) should not be 
replaced by a tiger (Russia) at Asia's backdoor. His speech was in the 
stilted language their radio and newspapers used when berating imperial­
ists and revisionists. 
On 12 May, just before the second talks were to begin that afternoon, 
their protocol officer suddenly rushed to the guesthouse to tell us that 
Chairman Mao would receive us. Visiting VIPs were usually not given 
any appointment to see the chairman. After they had sized up the visitor, 
if they thought it appropriate they would inform him at short notice that 
he would be given this signal honor of meeting their great leader. My wife 
and daughter were summoned back from sightseeing at the Summer 
Palace of the Empress Dowager without being told the reason. Select 
members of the delegation-myself , my wife and daughter, Rajaratnam 
(foreign minister), Hon Sui Sen (finance minister), and K. C. Lee (minis­
ter of state for culture)--were driven in a convoy to Mao's secluded resi­
dence. 
The cars turned into an old walled-off enclosure opposite the Great 
Hall of the People, called Zhongnanhai, near Tiananmen Square. We 
went through lacquered gates into a complex of Chinese-style low-rise 
villas sited around a lake, stopped at one of the villas, and were ushered 
in. In the drawing room was "the great helmsman," Mao Zedong, in a 
light grey Mao suit, supported by two female aides. We shook hands. 
Then we all sat down, correctly and properly, taking care not to cross our 
legs, a gesture of disrespect. For some 15 minutes, Mao spoke indistinctly 
and a middle-aged woman repeated his words in Mandarin in a high-
582 From Third World to First 
pitched voice. On several occasions, she wrote down some large Chinese 
characters to show to Mao who confirmed that that was what he had said. 
Then it was translated into English. It was not a substantial conversation. 
They had extended a courtesy to the Singapore delegation to signal that 
they considered us important enough. He no longer possessed the sharp 
intellect which Nixon and Henry Kissinger had described so eloquently 
after their meetings in 1972. I thought Mao had difficulty articulating 
not just his words but also his thoughts. I guessed he had Parkinson's dis­
ease. At 82, he looked mentally and physically frail. 
The next day their major newspapers, including the People's Daily, 
carried a front page photo of him with me seated on his left. The photo 
showed him better than he was face-to-face. Years later, I kept being 
asked by journalists and writers what he was like. In all honesty I could 
only say I did not know. What I had seen was a shadow of the man who 
had led the Long March, built up a guerrilla army into a powerful fight­
ing force, fought the Japanese in guerrilla actions until their surrender in 
August 1945, defeated the KMT Nationalist Army, and ultimately made 
the Communist Party supreme in China from 1949. He did liberate 
China from poverty, degradation, disease, and hunger, although famine 
killed millions because of his Great Leap Forward in 1958. But he did not 
liberate the Chinese people from ignorance and backwardness. Yes, "the 
Chinese people have stood up" as Mao proclaimed at Tiananmen on 1 
October 1949, but they do not yet stand tall. 
I had my second meeting with Hua at the Great Hall of the People 
for two hours later that afternoon. He continued in the same language of 
the day before, that as a socialist country China firmly supported the 
struggle of Third World countries in opposing imperialism, colonialism, 
and hegemonism. Likewise, it supported the revolutionary struggles of all 
countries, and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) had relations with 
many Marxist-Leninist parties in the world but did not interfere in the 
internal affairs of other countries. Party relations were one thing and state 
relations were another. I said I did not understand the logic of these state­
ments. Instead of meeting my argument directly, he said how the 
Malaysian government dealt with the MCP and its activities and what 
their relations with each other should be were "altogether an internal 
matter of the Malaysian governmen t." 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 583 
On Indochina, he emphasized China's "international duty" to support 
the peoples of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia in resisting "U.S. aggres­
sion." Soviet efforts to interfere and sow discord were unlikely to succeed 
as these countries would not give up their hard-won independence to 
another big power. It was a hint of the Sino-Soviet contest and impending 
problems with Vietnam. 
This ended the two formal meetings in my program. The following 
afternoon could be "talks or rest." We spent the morning of 13 May visit­
ing the Great Wall and the Ming tombs. It was warm, dry, and dusty. We 
were all thirsty. We ended up with a full Chinese lunch which I washed 
down liberally with beer at a restaurant near the Ming tombs. As we 
drove back in the Red Flag limousine without air-conditioning, I felt 
drowsy. 
When we arrived at the Diaoyutai guesthouse, the protocol officer 
was standing at the door to say that Premier Hua was waiting to have a 
meeting with me. They had given us no notice during the whole morning 
that there would be a meeting that afternoon, or I would not have gone on 
that long, tiring excursion. The program had stated either a meeting or 
tour of the Temple of Heaven. Since they had taken us on such an 
exhausting journey to the Great Wall and the Ming tombs, we had 
assumed that the afternoon was free. I was fatigued from the walk up the 
Great Wall and drowsy from the beer at lunch and the hot, dusty, 90-
minute drive back. Their tactics reminded me of those of the communist 
cadres in Singapore who often tried to wear us down. I went upstairs to 
wash with cold water, drank several glasses of Chinese tea, and freshened 
up as best I could. I went down at 4:00 P.M. to what was to be a two-hour 
meeting. 
We spent some time fencing over the niceties of party-to-party and 
government-to-government relations. I asked, "Will you support an 
Indonesian communist party which sets out to liberate Singapore or con­
sider that an unjust war?" He replied, "The question is hypothetical and 
does not exist. The Indonesian invasion of East Timar was wrong. The 
people of East Timar should have the right to choose their own social sys­
tems and government." I persisted, "Is the Malaysian Communist Party, 
calling itself the Malayan Communist Party, right or wrong to want to 
liberate Singapore?" He replied, "It is for the people of Singapore to 
584 From Third World to First 
choose their own social system and their own form of government. " I 
asked, "Then am I right that China will not support the liberation of 
Singapore by the Malayan Communist Party, because such a liberation 
should be by the people of Singapore, not the people of Malaysia?" He 
looked puzzled because he did not know that the Malayan Communist 
Party wanted to liberate both Malaya and Singapore. 
At this stage, Qiao Guanhua scribbled furiously and passed him a 
note. Like the tough security chief he was, he ostentatiously pushed aside 
the note without reading it, and said he did not know what the situation 
was, but wherever communist parties fought for liberation, they were 
bound to win because that was the tide of history. 
I explained that the MCP claimed to be the communist party to lib­
erate both peninsular Malaya and Singapore. So it would be useful at 
some stage for the PRC to make its position plain: that government­
to-government relations with Singapore would be correct; however, any 
party-to-party relations should be between the Chinese Communist Party 
and a communist party of Singapore that sought to liberate Singapore, 
not a party of Malaysia or Malaya like the MCP. 
Hua repeated that it was not possible for a foreign power to impose a 
socialist system on another country, if that was what I feared. I pressed 
him to clarify China's stand on principle that it was wrong for a Malayan 
communist party to liberate people in Singapore. He fudged, saying he 
had not studied the matter. I repeated my question but he still refused to 
clarify his position. 
Instead he went on the offensive, raising the main purpose of the 
meeting, Singapore's military links with Taiwan. He began softly, that 
there existed long-term traditional friendship between the peoples of 
China and Singapore, a "kinsman-like relationship" between the Chinese 
people and the people of Chinese descent in Singapore. He hoped rela­
tions would further improve after my visit. Then he became stern and in a 
serious tone said we had developed a "military relationship" with the 
"Chiang clique from Taiwan." This was in contravention of the one China 
position of the Singapore government and not beneficial to the develop­
ment of relations. 
I refused to be defensive. Yes, Singapore recognized that there was one 
China and that Taiwan and the mainland were one country. However, for 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 585 
the time being, the Nationalist government that retreated from the main­
land was in charge of Taiwan. I had to deal with the de facto authority in 
Taiwan. If the PRC were in physical charge of Taiwan I would have 
approached the PRC for training facilities. Singapore must have the abil­
ity to defend itself. Because of our limitations of air, sea, and land space, 
we have had to do our training in Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand. 
Before starting full-scale training in Taiwan in 1975, our foreign minis­
ter, Rajaratnam, had informed their foreign minister, Qiao Guanhua, that 
this move did not in any way reflect a change in our position of recogniz­
ing one China. Qiao Guanhua had not responded to Raja. 
Hua Guofeng concluded by stating that given the different social sys­
tems of the two countries, important differences existed. These did not 
matter, because both sides had found many common points through a 
frank exchange of views. Hua had pressed me as far as he could. 
I said the front page publicity in the People's Daily of my meeting 
with Chairman Mao would not be received with joy in Southeast Asia. It 
was better for China not to send a trade mission to Singapore until our 
neighbors' suspicions from this publicity had subsided. The more China 
embraced us as "kinsman country" the greater would be our neighbors' 
suspicions. It was difficult because Singapore's neighbors had significant 
Chinese minorities who played a disproportionate role in the economy 
and their economic success had aroused the jealousy and resentment of the 
indigenous peoples. Where they were of different religions, there was lit­
tle intermarriage as with the Muslims in Malaysia and Indonesia. This 
was a never-ending problem that China had to take into account. It was 
an important underlying factor in the relationship between China and the 
other countries in Southeast Asia. 
Hua said he had already made it very clear that "the Chinese govern­
ment recognises and respects the independence and sovereignty of Singa­
pore." China's policy toward the people of Chinese descent living abroad 
was clear. It did not approve of dual nationality . It encouraged these peo­
ple to take the nationality of their country of residence of their own voli­
tion. All those who did so would automatically lose their Chinese citizen­
ship. He was happy that the overwhelming majority of people of Chinese 
descent in Singapore had already become citizens, and together with 
peoples of other nationalities (meaning "races"), were building up their 
586 From Third World to First 
own country. The traditional friendship and "kinsman-lik e" relationship 
between the peoples of Singapore and China were beneficial to the devel­
opment of relations. His turgid, cliched rhetoric jarred. Raja thought he 
lacked the sophistication and subtlety of Zhou Enlai, who, Raja believed, 
would have handled the discussions differently and without communist 
jargon. I was disappointed that the leader of such a huge country looked 
tough and strong but lacked finesse. He merely trotted out the standard 
party line when dealing with questions of race and kinship, and indulged 
in sophistry differentiating government-to-government from party-to­
party relations to justify China's interference in our internal affairs. And 
he would not admit the contradiction between his theory that liberation 
must come from within and China's material and propaganda support for 
the Communist Party of Malaya to liberate Singapore by force. Qiao 
Guanhua and his foreign ministry officials familiar with Southeast Asia 
were uncomfortable as they watched their premier trying to browbeat, 
without success, the Singapore ministers. 
In my return banquet speech two nights later, I emphasized, "China 
and Singapore agreed that they should conduct their bilateral relations by 
concentrating on those matters on which there is agreement and not those 
on which we have different views because of different basic assump­
tions .... Premier Hua says that being a socialist country, China supports 
the revolutionary struggle of all countries. But Premier Hua also states 
that China does not interfere in the internal matters of other countries, 
and that how the Singapore government deals with its communists is a 
matter for the Singapore government to decide. Based on this non­
interference, I believe that we can develop our relations. " This public 
statement was to reinforce my hand against the communist united front 
elements in Singapore. 
That night after dinner, Premier Hua Guofeng drove with me in the 
Red Flag car from the guesthouse in Diaoyutai to Beijing Central 
Railway Station. It was a ceremonial send-off with thousands of school­
children waving colored paper flowers and chancing their farewell. They 
put me and the whole delegation, together with all the security, protocol, 
and baggage officers, on a special train for our provincial tour to the west. 
The train left Beijing at 10:15 P.M. In my carriage was a bathtub, the 
largest I had ever seen. I wondered why anyone would wane a bathtub 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 587 
instead of a shower in a railway carriage that jolted and shook. Perhaps it 
had been fitted out for Chairman Mao. We woke up in Yangchuan in 
Shaanxi province. After breakfast on the train, we were driven along a 
winding uphill road to Dazhai. There we were briefed by the revolution­
ary committee who had much experience in receiving VIP visitors. We 
listened to a well-practiced recitation of how revolutionary fervor con­
quered all. We slept overnight on the train and woke up at Xian to see the 
recent discoveries of the tomb of Emperor Qin Shihuang. They had just 
begun excavating the terracotta warriors there. 
Later, at a welcoming dinner given by the Shaanxi provincial rev­
olutionary committee, we listened to the first of many speeches that fol­
lowed Hua Guofeng's line in denouncing the "capitalist roader," someone 
who had sneaked into the Communist Party and was striving to restore 
capitalism. I had read that Deng Xiaoping had been removed from his 
position as second in command of the government and condemned as a 
"capitalist roader." When I first heard Hua use this term, I paid little 
attention, but from its constant repetition at every place we visited, I con­
cluded that this must be a serious matter; this man who remained 
unnamed had to be an important person if he needed to be condemned 
again and again. 
The next morning we left for Yenan, the legendary base of the Eighth 
Route Army, and the loess cave which had been Mao's study. At the 
museum of memorabilia, the guide, a young woman, spoke like a zealous 
evangelist. She referred to Mao with religious fervor as if he were God and 
Zhou Enlai and the other immortals of the Long March his archangels. A 
small white horse had been stuffed and put into a glass case because Zhou 
Enlai had ridden on it for part of the Long March. The guide's recitation 
was so oppressive that both Choo and Ling wandered off, leaving me to 
show interest and make polite responses. 
We stayed the night at Yangchialing, the biggest town near Yenan. 
Again we heard the compulsory denunciation of the "capitalist roader" by 
the prefectural revolutionary committee chairman. We flew back to Xian 
and stayed in the spacious guesthouse complex where I was given a suite 
with an enormous bathroom and dressing room. They said it had been 
specially built for Chairman Mao. These plush guesthouses were perks for 
provincial and Beijing leaders. 
588 From Third World to First 
We flew to Shanghai, to be greeted once more by dancing schoolgirls 
in gay-colored clothes carrying paper flags and flowers. At dinner, the 
chairman of the Shanghai municipal revolutionary committe e, a young 
man, denounced the "capitalist roader" with some vehemence and pas­
sion. We learned that Shanghai was the most leftist of all the cities and 
provinces and the base of the radicals around Mao's wife, Jiang Qing, and 
the Gang of Four who were to be arrested and imprisoned soon after Mao 
died. 
Toward the end of our provincial tour, some fraternization took place 
between their officials and members of my party who could speak 
Mandarin. They bantered as they helped each other to the dishes at din­
ner, saying ironically , "zi Ii geng sheng," one of the slogans Mao promoted: 
"self-reliance, self-help," meaning, I will help myself to the food, there is 
no need for you to serve me. The ice was breaking. Behind the disciplined 
exterior of the communist cadre was a human being who appreciated 
good food and good wines, which they enjoyed only when VIPs came vis­
iting. 
Then a last dinner by the Guangdong provincial and the Guangzhou 
(Canton) municipal revolutionary committees. Mercifully only one speech 
and one last denunciation of the "capitalist roader," delivered with abso­
lutely no passion or conviction. 
The next morning they gave us a colorful send-off at the Canton rail­
way station before we boarded the special train for Shenzhen. For the final 
time, hundreds of schoolgirls bounced up and down carrying paper flags 
and flowers, chanting goodbye. I wondered how they could allow stu­
dents to miss classes for such displays. Two hours later we were at Lo Wu. 
As we walked across the border away from China we breathed a sigh of 
relief at leaving behind the chants and slogans. 
All of us had been eager to see this new mysterious China. For ethnic 
Chinese in Nanyang it had a mystical appeal as their ancestral homeland. 
The Chinese put their children in their best clothes to greet and send us 
off at airports, railway stations, kindergartens, and other places we visited. 
Their bright-colore d frocks, jumpers, and sweaters were worn only on 
special occasions and then carefully put away. The mass of the Chinese 
people wore drab dark blue or dark grey ill-fitting unisex Mao jackets. 
We did not know it then, but these were the last few months of the Mao 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 589 
era. He was to die four months later, after the Tangshan earthquake that 
September. Later, I was glad to have seen the country before Deng 
Xiaoping opened up China, to have witnessed the enforced uniformity of 
dress and speech and listened to their mind-numbing propaganda. 
Everyone we met gave the same answers to our questions. At Beijing 
University I asked students what they would do after they graduated. The 
answers came pat, "Whatever the party decides, how I can best serve the 
people." It was disturbing to listen to parrot-like responses from highly 
intelligent young people. The answers were all politically correct but not 
sincere. 
It was a strange world. I had read about China, especially after the 
Nixon visit. But the relentless assault of the huge slogans-painted or 
pasted on walls, on giant placards planted in the middle of wheat and rice 
fields, all in the fiercest revolutionary terms-was a surrealistic experi­
ence. To have these slogans blaring forth from loudspeakers in railway sta­
tions and public parks and on the radio numbed the senses. We found lit­
tle of such fervor in the people, except when they had to speak to us about 
the Cultural Revolution in simulated animated tones of praise. It was a 
kind of Chinese Potemkin village. 
Dazhai was their model commune in mountainous, infertile Shaanxi 
in the northwest. For years it was frequently praised in their media for 
regularly producing miracle harvests. Daqing in the northeast was where 
the oilfields were. Mao's slogan was: To learn about agriculture, study 
Dazhai. To learn about industry, study Daqing-Nong ye xue Dazhai. Gong 
ye xue Daqing. So, I had asked to see Dazhai. 
Ten years later, they disclosed that Dazhai was a fraud. Its higher out­
puts were due to special inputs that made its agricultural yield so high. In 
the Daqing oilfields the model workers did not extract the maximum 
from the ground because of poor technology, and their yields were going 
down. Revolutionary fervor could not make up for expertise, whether in 
agriculture or in mining. The belief in the Mao era, "Better Red than 
Expert," was a fallacy, a fraud practiced on the people. 
At every provincial capital, the chairman of the revolutionary council 
(or governor, as he was known after the Cultural Revolution had officially 
ended) gave me a welcoming dinner. Each uttered the same denunciation 
and vituperation of "the capitalist roader," the code name for Deng 
590 From Third World to First 
Xiaoping. We could make no sense of it, not understanding then the 
coded language they used to denounce him. I watched the solemn faces of 
the men who read out the speeches deadpan. The interpreters knew by 
heart what was coming and simply repeated the stock phrases in English 
again and again. I wondered what their real feelings were, but none 
betrayed their thoughts. 
There was such a welter of impressions that it took us some time to 
sort them out. I compared notes with Choo every night. If they were 
eavesdropping as the Russians did in Moscow in 1970, they did not show 
it. My daughter Wei Ling, then a third-year medical student, accompa­
nied us. She had been completely Chinese-educated in Nanyang Girls' 
High School up to O levels, 10 years of formal education in the Chinese 
language before she switched to English for her A levels to study medi­
cine at our university . She had no difficulty with the language, but she 
had immense difficulty in really understanding them, their inner 
thoughts. When she wandered about on her own in the provincial cities 
we visited, crowds would gather around her out of curiosity. Where was 
she from? Singapore. Where was that? Their women at dinners were 
equally interested in Ling. She looked Chinese, spoke their language, yet 
was unlike them in her behavior-not shy, talking freely in adult com­
pany. She was well-dressed compared to them, forward and outward­
going, like a girl from the moon. She herself felt different from them. 
Like me, she found the constant barrage of propaganda from the loud­
speakers and the radio a deafening and deadening experience. 
My daughter's reactions were a revelation. She had studied precom­
munist Chinese history and literature in a Chinese school and looked 
forward to seeing the historic monuments, cultural artifacts, and scenic 
wonders, especially those referred to in the purple passages she had mem­
orized. But seeing their poverty juxtaposed against mountains and tem­
ples with those romantic-sounding names convinced her that China's 
emphasis on being the world's oldest continuous civilization was an 
obstacle to its catching up with the developed world; that Singapore was 
better off because we had no such stumbling block. 
She was surprised to see how different China was from even the East 
European countries she had visited with me--more isolated from outside 
influence--and how thoroughly the people had been indoctrinated to pro-
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 591 
duce politically correct standard answers however junior the official, from 
whatever province. She had few opportunities to interact with ordinary peo­
ple. Wherever she jogged or walked, her security escort accompanied her 
and sealed her off. What she tired of seeing were the big-character slogans, 
several in fashion then: "Criticize Confucius---Criticize Deng Xiaoping, " 
"Crush bourgeois economism [sic)," "Long live the ever-victorious Mao 
Zedong thought." She was amazed at the people's unquestioning obedience 
to authority. By the end of the visit she was glad her ancestors had chosen to 
seek their fortunes in Nanyang. 
Before this visit, our government had been strict in refusing Singa­
poreans under the age of 30 permission to visit China. On my return I 
instructed that this ruling be reviewed, convinced from my own observa­
tions and Ling's reactions that the best way to eradicate romantic ideas 
about the great fatherland was to send them on a visit, the longer the bet­
ter. Soon thereafter, we removed this restriction. 
I was impressed by the size of China and the vast differences between 
their 30 provinces. What I was not prepared for was the gaggle of differ­
ent accents I came across. It was difficult to understand many of them. 
Premier Hua was a Hunanese with a thick accent. Very few of the people I 
met spoke standard pu tong hua (the common language, Mandarin). The 
range of dialects and accents when they spoke "Mandarin" was so great 
that when we got to Guangzhou their interpreter who accompanied me, 
an excellent interpreter, could not understand the elderly member of the 
revolutionary council who came from Hainan island, even though he was 
speaking what he thought was Mandarin. I understood him because we 
had many Hainanese in Singapore who spoke Mandarin like his, so I 
interpreted their Hainanese revolutionary council member to their inter­
preter! This is a small example of the problem of unifying China through 
a common language. China is one and a half to two times the size of con­
tinental Europe in population and area. The Chinese are 90 percent Han 
Chinese using the same script. But they have different consonant and 
vowel values for the same written word and have developed different 
idioms and slang in their various provinces and even in adjoining towns 
in the same province. They have been trying to unify their language since 
the overthrow of the Qing dynasty in 1911, but it will be a very long 
time before they succeed. With satellite TV, radio, and cellular tele-
592 From Third World to First 
phones, they may be able to achieve it in another one to two generations, 
but only for the better-educated of their younger population. 
For a fortnight in China we were on the move every day, accompanied 
by different hosts in the different provinces, attended to by their 
Southeast Asia desk officers, interpreters, and protocol, baggage, and 
security officers who accompanied us all the way from Beijing to 
Guangzhou. Toward the end it became a strain to always be on our best 
behavior. They had officials in their team who spoke every language and 
dialect we did. Whether we spoke Hokkien, Malay, or English, they had 
officials who had lived in Southeast Asia, or had served in Indonesia for 
many years, and spoke Malay, Bahasa Indonesia, or Hokkien like a native, 
and could eavesdrop and understand us. So we could not switch languages 
to cut them out. On the few nights we had dinner by ourselves we had a 
hilarious time comparing notes. 
At every stop the Beijing officials who looked after us and our needs 
would engage members of our party in conversation to gauge our atti­
tudes on various issues and our reactions to them. They were very thor­
ough. Our press writers told us that late every night they were seen dis­
cussing the day's findings and writing up detailed reports of the day's 
conversations and observations. I wondered who would read them--obvi­
ously somebody must, because they took their reporting seriously. I con­
cluded one reason they wanted me to visit was their desire to meet me 
face-to-face and assess my character and attitudes. 
As we bade them goodbye at the railway station in Guangzhou, the 
desk officer in charge of Southeast Asia and Singapore, a tall, consumptive­
looking man in his fifties, told K. C. Lee that after observing me for two 
weeks, he found me hard and tough. I took that as a tribute. When they 
clapped their hands in unison to welcome me, I waved back. I did not clap 
back, as was their form. I felt it ridiculous to clap in response. I made a 
point of being Singaporean and different. We reacted alike: Neither Choo, 
Ling, nor I felt we were one of them. In fact, we had never felt more un­
Chinese than on that first visit. 
It was also embarrassing, when visiting a factory or exhibition, to be 
offered, as was their custom, a brush, Chinese ink on a slab of slate, and a 
sheet of rice paper or a clean page in a book to write my comments. Since 
my acquaintance with a Chinese brush was limited to a few months in 
China: The Dragon with a Long Tail 593 
primary school, I had to decline and ask for an ordinary pen to write my 
comments in English. 
This feeling of not being Chinese became less intense as I got to know 
them better and was no longer distracted by the differences of speech, 
dress, and manners. But on that first visit, we found them and their man­
ners alien. With the Chinese in the south, we could have passed off in 
appearance as one of them. But even so we felt keenly that we were not 
one of them. 
I was to discover that many of our young Chinese students who went 
back to China in the 1950s to contribute to the revolution were never 
accepted into Chinese society. They were always separate, hua qiao or over­
seas Chinese, different, "softies" who did not quite belong. It was sad; 
they had gone back because they wanted so much to contribute and 
belong. They were, or perhaps had to be, treated differently with perks 
and privileges not available to the locals, or life would have been too diffi­
cult for them. And because of those perks and privileges, they were 
resented. It was difficult for both sides. Sentiments of kinship were fine 
provided the overseas relative lived abroad and visited occasionally bear­
ing gifts and greetings. But to stay and be part of China was to be a bur­
den unless the relative had special skills or knowledge. Many who went 
back with romantic revolutionary ideals ended up as emigres in Hong 
Kong and Macau, where they found life more congenial, more like that in 
the Singapore and Malaya they once despised and abandoned. Many of 
them had petitione d to be allowed to return to Singapore. Our Internal 
Security Department strongly recommended against this, suspecting 
plants by the MCP who would create trouble. It was a total misreading of 
the true position. These people had been thoroughly disillusioned with 
China and communism and would have been our best inoculation against 
the virus of Maoism. 
We are so much like the Chinese in the southern provinces in physical 
appearance. We have the same cultural values, in attitudes toward rela­
tionships between the sexes, relations within the family, deference due to 
our elders, and other social norms regarding family and friends. But we 
are so different in our outlook and view of the world and of our place in 
this world. Theirs is so huge a country that they feel absolutely confident 
there will be a seat for them at the top table once they have put them-
594 From Third World to First 
selves right, and it was only a matter of time. No Chinese doubts their 
ultimate destiny after they have restored their civilization, the oldest in 
the world with 4,000 years of unbroken history. We, the migrants who 
have cut our roots and transplanted ourselves on a different soil, in a very 
different climate, lack this self-confidence. We have serious doubts about 
our future, always wondering what fate has in store for us in an uncertain 
and fast-changing world. 
37. Deng Xiaoping 's China 
My meeting with Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping was unforgettable. A dap­
per, stocky man of 74, not more than five feet tall, in a beige Mao suit 
came down from a Boeing 707 at Paya Lebar airport in November 1978. 
Walking briskly, he inspected the guard of honor, then drove with me to 
the lstana Villa, our guesthouse in the lstana domain. We met that after­
noon for formal discussions in the cabinet room. 
After seeing the spittoons in the Great Hall of the People, I had 
arranged for a blue-and-white porcelain spittoon to be placed next to 
Deng. I had read that he regularly used one. I also placed an ashtray 
ostentatiously for him alone although there was a no-smoking rule for air­
conditioned rooms in the lstana. It was a gesture to a great figure in the 
history of China. I made sure that the exhaust fan serving the cabinet 
room was switched on. 
I welcomed him as a great Chinese revolutionary. He replied that 
Singapore could be said to be an old place for him. Fifty-eight years before, 
in 192(), he had visited it for two days on his way to France. When I vis­
ited Beijing in 1976, he had not been able to meet me; at that time he had 
been "shoved aside." He had been defeated by the Gang of Four, but in the 
end they were defeated. He spent the next two and a half hours on the dan­
gers the Soviet Union posed to the world. All countries and peoples who 
did not want war had to form a united front against the warmongers. He 
quoted Mao: We should all unite to cope with the wang ba dan (literally 
"tortoise egg" but translated by his interpreter as the S.O.B). He gave a 
596 From Third World to First 
comprehensive survey of Soviet maneuvres in Europe, the Middle East, 
Africa, South Asia, and finally in Indochina. The Soviets had scored 
immensely in Vietnam. Some people did not understand why relations 
between China and Vietnam were so bad, and why China had taken action 
such as cutting off aid, which pushed Vietnam toward the Soviet Union 
instead of winning it over. The question to ask was, why did Vietnam see 
fit to fall completely into the lap of the Soviet Union when it was not in 
their interest? The answer was Vietnam's "fond dream for many years of the 
Indochina federation." Even Ho Chi Minh had had such an idea. China had 
never agreed to it, and Vietnam regarded China as the greatest obstacle to 
its realization of this federation. China had concluded that Vietnam would 
not change and would become more anti-China. The expulsion of ethnic 
Chinese from Vietnam was one such manifestation. After careful consider­
ation China had decided to cut aid. 
Deng said China's total aid to Vietnam had been over US$ IO billion, 
at current value worth US$20 billion. When China cancelled aid to 
Vietnam, the Soviet Union had to carry this burden alone. When they 
could not satisfy Vietnam's needs, they got it admitted to COMECON 
(the communist bloc counterpart to the EEC), to shift the burden to the 
East European countries. The Vietnamese were also putting out their beg­
ging bowls before Japan, America, France, Western Europe, and even 
Singapore. In 10 years' time, he said, China would consider pulling 
Vietnam from the Soviet Union again. I thought to myself that Deng 
took a very long view, totally different from American leaders. 
He said the real and urgent problem was a possible massive invasion 
of Cambodia by Vietnam. What would China do? he asked rhetorically. 
What China would do would depend on how far the Vietnamese went, he 
answered himself. He repeated this a few times, not committing himself 
outright to a counterattack on Vietnam. He said if Vietnam succeeded in 
controlling the whole of Indochina, many Asian countries would be 
exposed. The Indochina federation would expand its influence and serve 
the global strategy of the Soviet Union to move southward into the 
Indian Ocean. Vietnam's role was that of a Cuba of the East. The Soviets 
were drastically increasing their Pacific fleet. The world had witnessed 
great turbulence in the last two years as was evident from events in 
Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iran, and Pakistan, all pointing to a southward 
Deng Xiaoping's China 597 
thrust by the Soviet Union. China's policy was to counter the strategic 
deployment of the Soviet Union, whether in Zai're or Somalia. Wherever 
the Soviet Union attacked, China would help to repel the attack. To have 
peace, Asean had to unite with China and repel the Soviet Union and its 
Cuba in Southeast Asia, Vietnam. His two interpreters did not take notes 
diligently ; they only made a few squiggles. I concluded he must have 
made the same presentation in Bangkok and Kuala Lumpur and they 
knew it by heart. It was past sunset when he finished. I asked whether he 
would like me to respond or adjourn till the next day to give him time to 
change for dinner, and for me to think over what he had said. He pre­
ferred not to let the dinner get cold. 
At dinner, he was sociable and friendly, but still tense. Vietnam's 
invasion of Cambodia was very much on his mind. When I pressed him­
what would China do, now that General Kriangsak, the prime minister of 
Thailand, had committed himself on China's side by giving Deng such a 
warm reception in Bangkok-he again muttered that it depended how far 
they went. My impression was that if the Vietnamese did not cross the 
Mekong River, it would not be so dangerous, but if they did, then China 
would do something. 
He invited me to visit China again. I said I would when China had 
recovered from the Cultural Revolution. That, he said, would take a long 
time. I countered that they should have no problem getting ahead and 
doing much better than Singapore because we were the descendants of 
illiterate, landless peasants from Fujian and Guangdong while they had 
the progeny of the scholars, mandarins, and literati who had stayed at 
home. He was silent. 
The next day I made my points in one hour-actually half an hour, 
without the translation. I summarized what he had said about the Soviet 
threat by referring to well-documented studies of their military capabili­
ties by the International Institute of Strategic Studies in London. I 
pointed out that Germany's Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, France's 
President Valery Giscard d'Estaing, and American leaders in Washington 
had given me different conclusions on the dangers the Soviet Union 
posed. Some of them believed the Soviets were wasting too much of their 
resources on armaments. Anyway, small countries like Singapore could 
only take note of these world trends but could not influence the outcome. 
598 From Third World to First 
We had to analyze the situation from a regional, not a global, viewpoint. 
The problem after the end of the Vietnam War was that American troops 
had withdrawn from Vietnam and Thailand. It was clear that they would 
never again engage communist insurgents on the Asian mainland. The 
next question was how long American forces would stay in the 
Philippines to balance the growing Soviet fleet in the Indian and Pacific 
Oceans. Singapore wanted the United States to stay in the Philippines. 
To allay Deng's concern about Singapore's attitude to the Soviets, I 
listed our main trading partners-Japan, the United States, Malaysia, and 
the European Union, each with 12 to 14 percent of our total world trade. 
China was only 1.8 percent and the Soviet Union a mere 0.3 percent. 
Soviet contribution to our economic life was negligible. I also needed no 
lessons on the hegemonistic behavior of the Russians. I recounted to him 
how in 1967, after visiting Abu Simbel and Aswan, when I was returning 
to Cairo on an Egyptian aircraft accompanied by an Egyptian minister, 
there was a commotion in the cockpit as the plane was about to land. The 
minister excused himself to go to the cockpit. After the plane landed, I 
discovered that the Soviet pilot of another plane had told airport control 
he did not understand English, and demanded priority to land ahead of 
the VIP plane. The Egyptian minister had to bark his order from the 
cockpit to ensure that the VIP plane landed before the Soviet plane. I 
needed no lessons on the arrogance of the Russians. 
China wanted Southeast Asian countries to unite with it to isolate the 
"Russian bear"; the fact was that our neighbors wanted us to unite and 
isolate the "Chinese dragon." There were no "overseas Russians" in 
Southeast Asia leading communist insurgencies supported by the Soviet 
government, as there were "overseas Chinese" encouraged and supported 
by the Chinese Communist Party and government, posing threats to 
Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines, and, to a lesser extent, Indonesia. 
Also, China was openly asserting a special relationship with the overseas 
Chinese because of blood ties, and was making direct appeals to their 
patriotism over the heads of the governments of these countries of which 
they were citizens, urging them to return and help China in its "Four 
Modernizat ions." 
A few weeks earlier, in October, Vietnamese Prime Minister Pham 
Van Dong had visited us and where Deng was now seated. I had asked 
Deng Xiaoping's China 599 
Pham Van Dong the reason for Vietnam's trouble with the overseas 
Chinese, or Hoa people; his blunt answer was that, as an ethnic Chinese, 
I should know that ethnic Chinese would always support China all the 
time, just as Vietnamese would support Vietnam, wherever they might 
be. I was less concerned with what Pham Van Dong thought than with 
the impact of what he must have told the leaders of Malaysia. I recounted 
another incident where the Vietnamese permanent representative to the 
UN had told the four Asean permanent representatives that the Viet­
namese had treated the Hoa people equally, and yet they turned ungrate­
ful; that was the main cause of the exodus of 160,000 ethnic Chinese from 
Hanoi to China across their border, while other Chinese fled from the 
south in boats. The Indonesian permanent representative, forgetting that 
his colleagues from the other three Asean countries-Philippines, Thai­
land, and Singapore-were ethnic Chinese, told the Vietnamese that they 
had been too kind and generous to the Hoa people, and that they should 
learn from the Indonesians. I left Deng in no doubt as to the visceral sus­
picions of its neighbors Singapore faced. 
Pham Van Dong, I added, had placed a wreath at Malaysia's National 
Monument. Deng had refused to do this. Pham Van Dong had also 
promised he would not help subversion. Deng had not. The Malaysians 
must be suspicious of Deng. There were underlying suspicions and ani­
mosity between Malay Muslims and Chinese in Malaysia, and between 
Indonesians and their ethnic Chinese. Because China was exporting revo­
lution to Southeast Asia, my Asean neighbors wanted Singapore to rally 
with them, not against the Soviet Union, but against China. 
Asean governments regarded radio broadcasts from China appealing 
directly to their ethnic Chinese as dangerous subversion. Deng listened 
silently. He had never seen it in this light: China, a big foreign power, 
going over the governments of the region to subvert their citizens. I said 
it was most unlikely that Asean countries would respond positively to his 
proposal for a united front against the Soviet Union and Vietnam and 
suggested that we discuss how to resolve this problem. Then I paused. 
Deng's expression and body language registered consternation. He 
knew that I had spoken the truth. Abruptly, he asked, "What do you 
want me to do?" I was astonished. I had never met a communist leader 
who was prepared to depart from his brief when confronted with reality, 
600 From Third World to First 
much less ask what I wanted him to do. I had expected him to brush my 
points aside as Premier Hua Guofeng had done in Beijing in 1976 when I 
pressed him over the inconsistency of China's supporting the Malayan 
Communist Party to foment revolution in Singapore, not Malaya. Hua 
had answered with bluster, "I do not know the details, but wherever com­
munists fight, they will win." Not Deng. He realized that he had to face 
up to this problem if Vietnam was to be isolated. I hesitated to tell this 
seasoned, weather-beaten revolutionary what he should do, but since he 
had asked me, I said, "Stop such radio broadcasts; stop such appeals. It 
will be better for the ethnic Chinese in Asean if China does not underline 
their kinship and call upon their ethnic empathy. The suspicion of the 
indigenous peoples will always be there, whether or not China emphasizes 
these blood ties. But if China appeals to these blood ties so blatantly, it 
must increase their suspicions. China must stop radio broadcasts from 
south China by the Malayan and Indonesian Communist Parties." 
Deng said simply that he needed time to think about what I had said, 
adding that he would not learn from Pham Van Dong. He, Deng, had also 
been asked to lay a wreath at the National Monument which commemo­
rated those who had killed Malayan communists. As a communist, it had 
been impossible for him to do this. Pham Van Dong could do such a 
thing because he was "that kind of a communist. " He was "selling his 
soul." China, he emphasized, spoke honestly. The Chinese had never con­
cealed their views, and what the Chinese people said counted. During the 
Korean War, China had issued a statement that if the Americans 
approached the Yalu River, the Chinese people could not sit idly by. But 
the Americans took no notice. On foreign policy, China always spoke 
what it thought. As for communist parties, he had nothing to add, so the 
interpreter said. But in his Mandarin, what Deng actually said was, he 
had "lost interest in stating it again." 
The reiteration of their overseas Chinese policy, he said, was for two 
reasons: The first was the anti-Chinese activities of Vietnam; the second 
was the internal considerations of China, the result of the activities of the 
Gang of Four in the Cultural Revolution. Relatives in China of the over­
seas Chinese had suffered badly, with many persecuted and imprisoned. 
He wanted to restate China's position on ethnic Chinese abroad: that 
China favored and encouraged them to take up the citizenship of the 
Deng Xiaoping' s China 601 
country of residence, that those who wanted to remain Chinese would still 
have to abide by the laws of the country of residence, and that China did 
not recognize dual nationality. 
On Cambodia, he assured me that China's approach would not be 
affected by the conclusion of the Soviet-Vietnamese treaty of friendship 
and cooperation. China was not afraid that Vietnam might ask the Soviet 
Union to threaten China, adding that the Soviet Union would not dare to 
engage China in a big way. He looked deadly serious when he added that 
China would punish the Vietnamese if they attacked Cambodia. China 
would make them pay a heavy price for it, and the Soviet Union would 
discover that supporting Vietnam was too heavy a burden. Then he asked 
what advice China's friends (meaning Singapore) would give on the prob­
lems confronting both countries (China and Singapore). 
I replied that Cambodia's leaders must be sensitive to international 
opinion as they needed the sympathy of the world. They were behaving in 
an irrational way with no feeling for their own people. Deng's response 
was that he also did not "understand" some of the things done in Phnom 
Penh; he made no defense of the Khmer Rouge's genocide. 
Winding up, I said Deng had stated that China needed 22 years for 
modernization. In these 22 years, if there were no unnecessary problems 
created in Southeast Asia, conditions should improve. If there were such 
problems, the consequences would be adverse for China, as they had been 
for Vietnam and Cambodia. Deng agreed with me. He hoped there would 
be unity and stability in Asean. He was saying this "from the bottom of 
my heart." 
He was the most impressive leader I had met. He was a five-footer, 
but a giant among men. At 7 4, when he was faced with an unpleasant 
truth, he was prepared to change his mind. Two years later, after they had 
made alternative arrangements for their fraternal communist parties in 
Malaysia and Thailand, the radio broadcasts stopped. 
During dinner, I had urged him to smoke. He said, pointing to his 
wife, that the doctor had told her to get him to stop. He was trying to cut 
down. That night, he did not smoke or use the spittoon. He had read that 
I was allergic to smoke. 
Before his departure I called on him at the lstana Villa to talk for 
some 20 minutes. He was glad he had come and seen Singapore again 
602 From Third World to First 
after 58 years. It was a dramatic transformation and he congratulated me. 
I replied that Singapore was a small country with two and a half million 
people. He sighed and said, "If I had only Shanghai, I too might be able 
to change Shanghai as quickly. But I have the whole of China!" 
He said he had wanted to visit Singapore and America before he 
joined Karl Marx-Singapore, because he had seen it once when it was a 
colonial territory, while on his way to Marseilles after the end of the First 
World War to work and study; America, because China and America 
must talk to each other. It was not until after Vietnam occupied Cambodia 
that I understood why he was keen to visit the United States. 
During the drive to the airport, I asked him point-blank what he 
would do if the Vietnamese attacked Cambodia. Would he leave the Thais 
vulnerable and watch them being intimidated, and then forced to bend 
toward the Soviet Union? He pursed his lips, and his eyes narrowed as he 
whispered, "It depends how far they will go." I said he would have to do 
something after the Thai prime minister had so openly and whole­
heartedly received him in Bangkok. Kriangsak had to rely on China to 
maintain some balance. He looked troubled and again whispered, "It 
depends how far they will go." 
At the airport he shook hands with the VIPs and ministers, inspected 
the guard of honor, walked up the steps to his Boeing 707, then turned 
around and waved goodbye. As the door closed on him, I said to my col­
leagues that his staff were going to get a "shellacking." He had seen a 
Singapore his brief had not prepared him for. There had been no tumul­
tuous Chinese crowds, no rapturous hordes of Chinese Singaporeans to 
welcome him, just thin crowds of curious onlookers. 
A few weeks later I was shown articles on Singapore in their People's 
Daily. Its line had changed. Singapore was described as a garden city 
worth studying for its greening, public housing, and tourism. We were 
no longer "running dogs of the American imperialists. " Their view of 
Singapore changed further in October the following year, 1979, when 
Deng said in a speech, "I went to Singapore to study how they utilised 
foreign capital. Singapore benefited from factories set up by foreigners in 
Singapore: first, foreign enterprises paid 35 percent of their net profits in 
truces which went to the state; second, labour income went to the workers; 
and third, it [foreign investment} generated the service sectors. All these 
Deng Xiaoping's China 603 
were income [for the state}." What he saw in Singapore m 1978 had 
become a point of reference as the minimum the Chinese people should 
achieve. 
At the end of January 1979, Deng visited America and restored diplo­
matic relations with President Carter without the United States abandon­
ing Taiwan. He was making sure the United States would not align itself 
with the Soviet Union when China attacked and "punished " Vietnam. 
That was why he was keen to visit the United States. 
At the governor's lodge at Fanling in Hong Kong for a golfing holi­
day, I met David Bonavia, a China expert, formerly of the London Times. 
He dismissed Deng's warning as an idle threat because the Soviet navy 
was in the South China Sea. I said that I had met Deng three months ago 
and he was a man who weighed his words carefully. Two days later, on 
16 February 1979, Chinese forces attacked across the border with North 
Vietnam. 
China declared that the objectives of the military action were limited, 
and urged the UN Security Council to take immediate and effective mea­
sures to stop Vietnam's armed aggression against Cambodia and bring an 
end to Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia. The operation lasted one 
month. They incurred heavy losses but showed the Vietnamese that, 
whatever the cost, they could make deep incursions into Vietnam, destroy 
towns and villages in their path, and withdraw, as they did on 16 March 
1979. 
During China's invasion of Vietnam, Deng said publicly that China 
was prepared for a possible war with the Soviet Union, and that a lesson 
for Vietnam was also a lesson for the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union did 
not attack China. The Western press wrote off the Chinese punitive action 
as a failure. I believe it changed the history of East Asia. The Vietnamese 
knew China would attack if they went beyond Cambodia on to Thailand. 
The Soviet Union did not want to be caught in a long-drawn-out war in a 
remote corner of Asia. They could afford a quick decisive action against 
China, but the Chinese denied them this by declaring that their military 
action was a "punitive" action and was not intended to capture Vietnam. 
As Deng had predicted, the Soviet Union was saddled with the burden of 
604 From Third World to First 
supporting Vietnam, which they did for 11 more years until 1991, when 
the Soviet Union disintegrated. When this happened, the Vietnamese 
agreed in October 1991 to withdraw from Cambodia-after 12 years of 
costly and futile occupation. 
On my second visit to China in November 1980, I found many 
changes. The men who had got "helicopter " promotions during the 
Cultural Revolution had been quietly shunted aside and their keen, zeal­
ous attitudes were no longer on display. Our protocol officer's perpetual 
eager-beaver look was an enduring impression I had carried away from my 
first visit in 1976. With the Cultural Revolution officially denounced, 
the people appeared greatly relieved. 
Premier Zhao Ziyang met me for talks. He was a different character 
from Hua Guofeng or Deng Xiaoping. Of medium build, he had the com­
plexion of someone with a light suntan over his fine features. I had no dif­
ficulty understanding his Mandarin because he had a good, strong voice 
without any heavy provincial accent. He came from Henan, a province 
south of Beijing that had been the cradle of the Chinese civilization, a 
huge, once-rich agricultural area now poorer than the coastal provinces. 
We discussed the Cambodian issue and how we had to find an alter­
native to the Khmer Rouge guerrillas who were doing the bulk of the 
fighting. Zhao nodded his head, acknowledging that Pol Pot would be 
unacceptable to the world. I conceded that unfortunately the Khmer 
Rouge was the best fighting force against the Vietnamese. Zhao had just 
taken over as premier and lacked the confidence to settle issues on 
Cambodia and Vietnam without referring to Deng. I found him a reason­
able, balanced, and rounded man, not ideologically blinkered. 
An advance copy of my dinner speech had been given to their proto­
col. They wanted me to remove a passage critical of their policy toward 
the Communist Party of Malaya and its radio broadcasts from China. The 
passage read, "For years China instigated and helped guerrilla insurgency 
in Thailand, Malaya and Indonesia. Many Asean leaders have put these 
unfortunate events behind them. Unfortunate ly, a residue of China's past 
policies continues to trouble relations between China and Asean." 
When we resumed talks that afternoon, I referred to this. Their pro­
tocol had said that this part was unacceptable and had to be left out if the 
speech was to be delivered, otherwise there would be no speeches. This 
Deng Xiaoping's China 605 
was most unusual. I had already given copies to the Singapore press and 
they would have released it to the foreign correspondents, so it was not 
possible to delete anything. Zhao replied that the Chinese people would 
not forgive him if I delivered this speech and he did not respond to some 
of the points made by me. He did not want to turn "a grand and friendly 
banquet" held in my honor into an occasion for a hard exchange of words 
which would have an adverse international effect. There was no question 
of wanting to tell me what I should not say at the banquet; he was merely 
suggesting that both sides cancel the speeches. If my views were neverthe­
less made known to the public, he would understand. I agreed to no 
speeches. 
He launched into the Chinese view of Soviet global strategy. He 
assured me that China would do its part to allay the suspicions and fears 
of Malaysia and Indonesia toward China. Soviet objectives were to control 
oil resources and sea lanes, including the Straits of Malacca, in order to 
strangle Japan and Western Europe, and to some extent the United States; 
the collaboration between the Soviet Union and Vietnam was not one of 
fortuitous expediency but a strategic collaboration. He said Malaysia and 
Indonesia could never win over Vietnam away from the Soviet Union 
unless either Vietnam renounced regional hegemony , in which case it 
would not need the Soviet Union, or the Soviet Union renounced global 
hegemony , in which case it would not need Vietnam. 
As for party-to-party relations, it was a historical problem of a global 
nature and China was sincerely making efforts as far as possible so that it 
would not affect its relations with Asean countries. The problem would 
take some time to solve. He would say formally to me that China would 
solve the problem, but not overnight. 
The overseas Chinese question was another problem left over from 
history. China was not in favor of dual nationality and had encouraged 
Chinese living abroad to take up the nationality of their host countries . 
But if ethnic Chinese abroad remained Chinese nationals, China could not 
cease to have contact with them. As for the contributions made by ethnic 
Chinese abroad to China's modernization, this did not represent the pol­
icy of the government of the People's Republic of China. China would 
make an effort to reduce the suspicion of other countries over the question 
of overseas Chinese. However, both sides should be concerned with more 
606 From Third World to First 
important issues than the policy of China toward overseas Chinese. On 
Cambodia, I would be meeting Deng Xiaoping, who would deal with all 
the points I would wish to raise; in other words, Deng was the final 
authority . 
The next morning I met Deng Xiaoping for over two hours in a dif­
ferent room in the Great Hall of the People. He looked lively and vigor­
ous. He had been well-brief ed and did most of the talking. He said my 
talks with Zhao had gone well, adding that General Ne Win also had not 
delivered a speech at the banquet in his honor at the Great Hall of the 
People, but had "good talks" with the Chinese. This was his reassurance 
that the cancellation of my speech would make no difference to the out­
come of our talks. 
Deng argued that China was a huge country with a large population. 
It did not need the resources of other countries. It was preoccupied with 
the problem of uplifting its people out of poverty and backwardness, "a 
great undertaking that might take half a century." China was too popu­
lous. There were just too many things to do. He hoped I would explain 
China's "genuine and clear" position to Indonesia and Malaysia. China 
wanted to see a strong Asean, "the stronger, the better." China had a 
"global strategy" in handling its relations with Asean countries, the 
United States, Japan, and Western Europe. He fully understood Singa­
pore's position regarding establishing diplomatic relations with China, 
that we would do so after Indonesia. Singapore's calculations were correct 
and in conformity with Singapore 's "strategic considerations." 
On Cambodia, he said, there were two basic points that must be met: 
First, a political settlement of the Cambodian question must be based on 
Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia, otherwise there was nothing to 
talk about; second, there had to be unity among all resistance forces inside 
Cambodia. The Khmer Rouge was willing to unite with other resistance 
forces; it was prepared to accept Sihanouk or, if Sihanouk was not willing, 
Son Sann as head of state. But neither was willing, I said. He stressed 
there was no alliance to speak of without the Khmer Rouge forces. Pol 
Pot's policies were wrong, but any political settlement in Cambodia must 
be based on "prevailing realities." 
One such reality, I said, was that except for the PRC the rest of the 
world believed that Pol Pot was murderous and mad, and Sihanouk and 
Deng Xiaoping's China 607 
Son Sann were right in not working with the Khmer Rouge. Thailand 
and Singapore were in danger of being seen as stooges of China for sup­
porting the DK (Democratic Kampuchea) government's seat in the UN. 
In my view, two major problems had to be solved: first, international 
representat ion at the UN, because a vacant seat would eventually be filled 
by Heng Samrin; second, how to intensify resistance fighting in Cam­
bodia. Much of the fighting was by the Khmer Rouge, but this must not 
be forever. Malaysia and Indonesia must be satisfied that continued sup­
port of the DK government would not lead to the restoration of China's 
influence in Cambodia. Both believed Vietnam's argument that Asean's 
actions helped China to weaken Vietnam and would allow China to 
increase its influence in Southeast Asia. President Suharto had told me 
that in 10 years China could create great problems for the region. 
Instead of answering my points, Deng asked how the Malaysians and 
Indonesians could drive the Vietnamese out of Cambodia. I replied that 
neither was troubled by the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia; they 
believed a strong Vietnam could oppose any southward expansion by 
China. The problem was one of perspectives. The question was not what 
China intended to do, but what China was capable of doing, and whether 
it was in China's interest. Malaysia and Indonesia saw China as the sup­
porter of communist forces that had troubled them for the last 30 years. 
Deng repeatedly asked me to play a role in promoting an alliance 
between the Cambodian resistance groups. China had built a "palace-like 
residence" for Sihanouk in Beijing. There was friendship between him 
and Sihanouk, but they deliberately avoided talking politics. I recapitu­
lated his position: first, that China would support and encourage the 
establishment of a noncommunist force to resist the Vietnamese; second, 
that China would accept the emergence of an independent Kampuchean 
government after a Vietnamese withdrawal from Cambodia, even though 
China did not have any hold on such a government. He confirmed it. At a 
press conference in Beijing with foreign correspondents I made these two 
points. Their reports were never contradicted by the Chinese. 
Deng asked me to tell my Asean neighbors that they should not 
believe that any power which was communist would naturally have good 
relations with China. The Soviet Union was the biggest threat and one 
needed to have a good and clear understanding of the damaging effects of 
608 From Third World to First 
its global policy. He asked rhetorically what Indonesia would gain by 
thwarting China's policy of opposing Soviet global strategy. Making con­
cessions to Malaysia and Indonesia would not solve the problem, because 
they had the wrong strategic assessments. 
On that note, we went to lunch where they served a Chinese delicacy, 
the fabulous xiong zhang-bear's paws, braised tender in a rich gravy. It 
was the best gourmet meal I ever had at the Great Hall of the People. The 
chef had made a special effort for Deng's guests. (Bears are now an endan­
gered species in China.) 
Chinese protocol was correct in taking me to see Hua Guofeng last. 
He was still chairman of the Communist Party and therefore ranked 
higher than Deng, a vice chairman. But from the importance of the offi­
cials in attendance, I had no doubt whose words carried the day. 
Premier Zhao Ziyang met me again in Beijing in September 1985. He 
referred to me as an "old friend of China," their label for those they want 
to put at ease. Then he asked for my impression s of the places I had vis­
ited on my way to Beijing. 
His manner encouraged me to speak up. I said I could give inoffen­
sive observations, leaving out the critical, but that would be of no value to 
him. I first gave him my positive impressions. Shanghai had younger 
leaders than in 197 6, vigorous and dynamic; people looked happier and 
more prosperous in colorful clothes; there was construction everywhere; 
and the traffic problem was still manageable. I was impressed by the gov­
ernor of Shandong province, a vigorous go-getter, full of ideas and great 
ambition to upgrade the infrastructure of Shandong. He had plans for air­
ports in Jinan and Yantai, and had proposed three business projects to our 
businesspeople; his staff was well-organized. 
Then I gave the negatives: Bad old practices were unchanged. As 
prime minister for over 20 years, I had stayed in many guesthouses, and 
could guess the nature of the administration from their condition. Jinan's 
huge guesthouse complex gave an impression of waste; I was told my 
suite with its giant-size bathtub had been built specially for a visit by 
Chairman Mao. The labor to keep this complex in good condition could 
Deng Xiaoping's China 609 
be put to better use running a top-class hotel. Because guests in residence 
were few and far between, the staff were out of practice. 
Next, the poor road system. Parts of the 150-kilometer (approxi­
mately 90-mile) road from Jinan to Qufu, the birthplace of Confucius, 
were just mud tracks. The Romans built roads that lasted 2,000 years. 
China had labor and stones in abundance and there was no reason why 
there should be mud tracks linking Jinan, the provincial capital, to Qufu 
with its tourist potential. 
Singapore had little culture or history and a population of two and a 
half million, but it had three million tourists a year (in the mid-1980s). 
China's monuments and ruins resonated with history. Selling scenery, 
fresh air, fresh food, laundry services, curios, and souvenirs to tourists 
would give much employment and put money into the pockets of many 
people. China, with a population of about 1,000 million, had only 1 mil­
lion tourists a year-800,000 overseas Chinese and 200,000 foreigners. 
Hesitantly, I suggested that they might like to send some of their 
supervisors to Singapore. They would not encounter language and culture 
differences and could observe our work ethics and attitudes. Zhao wel­
comed my proposal. He suggested that our managers and experts at top, 
middle, and grass-roots level visit China to assess their workers in a 
Chinese context. I said their workers might not respect our supervisors, 
because they were "descendants of coolies from Fujian province." Later, 
they sent several delegations of managers of their state-owned enterprises 
to Singapore. They saw a different work culture that placed importance 
on the quality of work. 
He said China had three major economic tasks: first, build up infra­
structure like roads and railways; second, upgrade as many factories as 
possible; and third, improve the efficiency of their managers and workers. 
He described the problem of inflation. (This was to be one of the causes of 
the trouble in Tiananmen four years later.) He wanted more trade, eco­
nomic and technical cooperation between China and Singapore. China 
was ready to sign a three-year agreement with us to process not less than 3 
million tons of Chinese crude oil per year, and would import more chemi­
cal and petrochemical products from Singapore as long as they were at 
international prices. Thus began their participation in our oil industry. 
610 From Third World to First 
Their state oil company set up an office in Singapore to handle this busi­
ness and also do oil trading. 
On Cambodia, Zhao disclosed to me that the Vietnamese had offered 
to enter into secret negotiations with them. They had refused Vietnam's 
offer: It was not sincere and was designed to split China from Asean and 
from the Cambodian resistance groups. There could be no improvement 
in Sino-Vietnamese relations before the Vietnamese committed them­
selves to withdrawing from Cambodia. China had repelled repeated 
Vietnamese intrusions into Chinese territory; 700,000 soldiers, or 60 per­
cent of Vietnam's forces, were tied down on the China-Vietnam border 
but China had several hundred thousand men and would continue to 
pressure Vietnam. Unlike his hesitancy in 1980, Zhao now spoke confi­
dently on Cambodia and Vietnam and did not refer me to Deng. 
I was taken to meet Deng. He bantered about his advanced age of 81 
compared to my 62. I assured him that he did not look old. He was not 
worried about age. China had made satisfactory arrangements for person­
nel changes: "Even if the heavens collapsed, there would be people in 
China to shoulder it." China's domestic development, in every aspect, was 
reasonably good, with many changes in the last five years. Ten old leaders 
had retired from the politburo, their posts taken by younger leaders. 
Many leaders over the age of 60 had resigned from the central committee 
and 90 new, younger ones had been elected. These leadership changes had 
been in progress for seven years, but were still not completely satisfactory 
and needed further reshuffling. By right, he, Deng, should also retire, but 
there were a few problems he first had to solve. 
He repeated that he was already 81, ready to meet Marx, that it was a 
law of nature and everyone should be aware of it, except Mr. Chiang 
Ching-kuo. He asked when I had last met Chiang and whether he had 
solved the leadership problem. Only then did I realize that his opening 
remarks on age were not casual banter but a lead to Chiang and Taiwan. I 
said I last met Chiang in January, eight months earlier, that Chiang had 
diabetes, which was generally known, and that he was aware of his mor­
tality. Deng wondered aloud whether Chiang had made any personnel 
Deng Xiaoping's China 611 
arrangements after him. As best as I could see, he had, I replied, but could 
not say who would replace him eventually. Deng feared chaos and confu­
sion in Taiwan after Chiang's departure. At the moment, at least both 
sides shared a common feeling that there was only one China. Chaos could 
lead to the emergence of two Chinas. I asked how. He explained that there 
were two possible developments: First, there were forces in the United 
States and Japan which supported Taiwan's independe nce; second, the 
United States would continue to regard Taiwan as one of its unsinkable 
aircraft carriers. The present U.S. government (with Ronald Reagan as 
president) had not completely changed its policy on Taiwan. It regarded 
Taiwan as an important military base and wanted to keep it in its sphere 
of influence. Deng had discussed Taiwan with President Reagan the year 
before and had tried to persuade him to give up this aircraft carrier policy, 
pointing out that the United States had 10 other unsinkable aircraft carri­
ers around the world. Taiwan was of crucial importance to China. 
He had asked U.S. Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger his reaction 
to eventualities. If Taiwan refused to negotiate on reunification, what 
should China do? And if Taiwan became independent, what then? 
Because of these eventualities, China could not renounce the use of mili­
tary force to solve the Taiwan question, but it would make every effort to 
solve the problem and achieve reunification by peaceful means. He had 
told both President Reagan and Secretary of State George Shultz that 
Taiwan was the crux of relations between China and the United States. 
The previous Decembe r, he had asked British Prime Minister Thatcher 
to convey a message to President Reagan to help China achieve the re­
unification of Taiwan in his second term. He had also told Shultz 
and Weinberger that if they failed to handle the question properly and 
allowed the U.S. Congress to intervene, it would give rise to conflict in 
Sino-U.S. relations. China might not be able to attack Taiwan but could 
block the Straits of Taiwan. The United States could be drawn into the 
conflict. He had asked U.S. leaders what they would then do, but the 
response was that the United States did not answer hypothetical ques­
tions. There was a real possibility of such an eventuality. 
Knowing that Chiang Ching-kuo and I were good friends, he then 
requested me to convey his personal regards to "Mr. Chiang" when I next 
612 From Third World to First 
met him. I agreed. He hoped to be able to cooperate with Chiang, as both 
had been in the same university in Moscow in 1926 although not in the 
same class. Chiang was about 15 or 16 and Deng was 22 in 1926. (A 
month later I personally passed Deng's message to Chiang in Taipei. He 
listened in silence and did not reply.) 
As for the Cambodian situation, Deng said it was not unfavorable. I 
responded that what he had said in 1978, before Vietnam invaded 
Cambodia, had come about. The Vietnamese were stuck in Cambodia. We 
should continue to help the guerrilla forces to ensure that they stayed 
mired, with no trade, investments, or economic development and totally 
dependent on the Soviets. China's success in economic reforms, I said, 
would not be lost on the Vietnamese: They could have built up their own 
country and traded with the world instead of occupying their neighbor 
and suffering for it. 
Deng regretted that the Vietnamese leaders were not prepared to fol­
low China's way. He said "some friends" in Southeast Asia believed in 
Vietnam's publicity stances and empty promises. The true motive of 
Southeast Asian leaders (referring to Indonesia and Malaysia) was to use 
Vietnam and sacrifice the Cambodian nation in order to counter China 
whom they regarded as their real enemy. Deng then referred to 
Gorbachev; China had demanded that he remove three obstacles in the 
way of Sino-Soviet relations, the first of which was to stop military aid to 
Vietnam and to get the Vietnamese to withdraw from Cambodia. China 
had seen no sign of this. 
When I next met Zhao Ziyang, on 16 September 1988, he had been pro­
moted to general secretary. He saw me at my villa in Diaoyutai, their 
guesthouse complex, to speak about China's economic problems. He was 
disturbed by a wave of panic buying throughout China a few weeks ear­
lier, in late August and early September. They had had to reduce con­
struction, control the growth of money for consumption, and slow down 
economic growth. If other measures did not work, the government would 
have to stress party discipline-I took this to mean "punish high offi­
cials." The panic buying must have reminded him of the last days of the 
Nationalist government in 1947-1949. 
Deng Xiaoping's China 613 
Then he took me to the restaurant in the Diaoyutai complex to cele­
brate my 65th birthday. During dinner, he asked for my views on a re­
cent television series he had sent me, the "Yellow River Elegy," produced 
by some younger members of his reform program think tank. It had 
depicted a China steeped in feudal tradition, tied down by superstitions 
and bad old habits, a China that would not make a breakthrough and 
catch up with the modern world unless it abandoned its old conformist 
attitudes. 
I thought it overpessimistic. China need not abandon its basic cul­
tural values and beliefs in order to industrialize and modernize. Taiwan, 
South Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, and Singapore had all sought to pre­
serve their traditional values of thrift, hard work, emphasis on scholar­
ship, and loyalty to family, clan, and the wider nation, always placing 
community interest above individual interest. These Confucian values 
had resulted in social cohesion, high savings, and investments, which led 
to high productivity and growth. What China needed to change was its 
overcentralized system of administration and the attitudes and mindset of 
the people, so that people would be more receptive to new ideas, whether 
Chinese or foreign, and be willing to test them out and adapt them to 
China's circumstances. This the Japanese had done successfully. 
Zhao was concerned that China's economy was not taking off like 
those of the NIEs without being plagued by high inflation. I explained 
that this was because, unlike China, the NIEs never had to deregulate 
planned economies with prices for basic commodities controlled at unre­
alistically low levels. 
He exuded the quiet confidence of a good mind that took in briefs 
swiftly. Unlike Hua Guofeng, he was a gentleman, not a thug. He had a 
pleasant manner, neither abrasive nor bossy. But one needed to be tough 
and ruthless to survive at the top in China, and for the China of that 
period he was too liberal in his approach to law and order. When we 
parted, I did not know that within a year he would become a nonperson. 
The next day, 17 September 1988, I had my last meeting with Deng. 
He was suntanned after several weeks at Beidaihe, the seaside resort for 
China's leaders to the east of Beijing. He looked vigorous and his voice 
was strong. I praised China's economic progress. Yes, there had been 
"pretty good results" during the last decade, but good economic develop-
614 From Third World to First 
ment had created new problems. China had to curb inflation. It was 
important to strengthen discipline. The central government had to exer­
cise effective control but not contradict the opening up to the outside 
world. Good management was more important after opening up, other­
wise there would be anarchy and "great chaos under Heaven." China was a 
large country but backward in technology and even in culture. In the past 
decade, they had solved the problem of food and clothing. Now they 
wanted to reach a xiao kang (comfortably off) stage, quadrupling their 
1980 per capita GDP to between US$800 and US$1,000. China had to 
learn from others, "including you and even South Korea." 
I complimented him on the considerable changes in China, not only 
in new buildings and roads but, more importantly, in people's thinking 
and attitudes. People were more critical and questioning, but optimistic. 
I said his 1979 visit to the United States, telecast in daily half-hour pro­
grams, had shown U.S. conditions, changing Chinese perceptions of 
America forever. 
Deng remarked that the Americans had treated him very thought­
fully. He had told Secretary Shultz that Sino-U.S. relations were develop­
ing smoothly but the main problem remained Taiwan. He then asked 
whether I knew that "my schoolmate and your good friend" Chiang 
Ching-kuo had on many occasions said that he (Chiang) would "justify 
himself to history." Deng obviously wanted an answer to the message he 
had asked me to give to Chiang. I did not respond, because Chiang had 
not given any reply. Deng said that although the United States had pub­
licly declared it did not want to get involved in the reunification ques­
tion, the U.S. government had intervened in the handling of this ques­
tion. There were many obstacles to reunification but the "largest obstacle" 
was the United States. He repeated the point he had made when I last saw 
him, that the United States was using Taiwan as an "unsinkable aircraft 
carrier." When he normalized relations during his 1979 visit to Wash­
ington, President Carter had agreed that the United States would do three 
things: abrogate the joint defense treaty with Taiwan; withdraw U.S. 
troops from Taiwan; and sever diplomatic relations with Taiwan. These 
commitments had been carried out. But the United States intervened 
many times on the Taiwan question through its Congress, which passed 
Deng Xiaoping's China 615 
the Taiwan Relations Act and various resolutions interfering in China's 
internal affairs. He had told Reagan and Shultz that they had to recon­
sider their policy of maintaining "unsinkable aircraft carriers." Deng said 
he dearly wanted to ensure the reunification of Taiwan with the mainland 
before he went to meet Karl Marx. 
38. China Beyond Beijing 
In the 1980s and 1990s, I visited China almost every year to better under­
stand its leaders' motivations and ambitions for China. Because we had 
started from antagonisti c positions, we needed time and deeper interac­
tion to develop a relationship of confidence with China. China had been 
exporting revolution to turn Singapore into a communist state. When 
they had a fight with Vietnam on their hands, they needed better rela­
tions with Asean. It was during this period, from 1978 to 1991 when we 
worked in our different ways against Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia , 
that our perceptions of each other changed. 
On each visit, I would spend over a week touring the provinces, 
accompanied by a junior Chinese minister. Travelling with him across 
China for some 8 to 10 days on the same VIP aircraft, spending many 
hours together, I gained a better understanding of the thinking and back­
ground of their leaders. His wife would keep Choo company. 
On one such visit in 1980, I found China a very different country. My 
daughter Wei Ling was agreeably surprised. She had been sightseeing in 
Beijing and had noticed the more relaxed mood of Chinese people she 
met, now that Mao had died and the Gang of Four had been removed. 
Both officials and lao baixing (the 100 surnames, Chinese for hoi polloi) 
were freer and more at ease when speaking to her. I still remember some 
of the spectacular sights we visited including Chengde, the summer capi­
tal of Qing Emperor Qian Long, and the Yangtze River's Three Gorges. 
The trip down the Yangtze from Chongqing (formerly Chungking, 
618 From Third World to First 
Chiang Kai-shek's World War II capital in Sichuan) to Yichang at the exit 
of the gorges took one and a half days. To look up and see, high up on the 
perpendicular surface of sheer rock, huge Chinese characters carved thou­
sands of years ago to commemorate events and ideas was to be awed. It 
resonated with the history of a people struggling against immense odds. 
Even more startling was the sight of human beings working as beasts 
of burden, towing barges and small ships as they had done from time 
immemorial. Whole rows of men with ropes on their shoulders and backs 
pulled boats upstream for miles. It was as if time had stood still and the 
machines used in the rest of the world had missed them. 
On that trip the vice minister for foreign affairs, Han Nianlong, and 
his wife accompanied us. Both were able, well-informed and good com­
pany. Ten years my senior, he had a lively temperament and a nimble 
mind to match. He was a small man, well-groomed with good taste in 
Western clothes, often sporting a waistcoat. He understood English and 
had a keen sense of humor. He added to my education and enjoyment of 
my second visit. He had been in charge of the Vietnam conflict. In him 
the Vietnamese faced a formidable opponent. He had detailed knowledge 
of everything that concerned Vietnam and Cambodia. China was going to 
pin Vietnam down and exhaust it in the coming years, however long it 
might take. He was absolutely confident that the Vietnamese would, as 
President Ronald Reagan would say, "cry uncle." We spent several hours 
talking over meals on that ship. They had simple tastes in food, and after 
days of rich party food it was a relief to join them for a plain bowl of noo­
dles. We had been offered banquet food but asked for their simple fare. 
He came from one of the poorest provinces in China, Guizhou, which pro­
duced Maotai, their most famous liquor, more powerful than vodka. I 
have a healthy respect for its potency-its delayed kick is tremendous and 
even a heavy meal does not buffer its effect. Maotai flowed freely but I 
asked for beer. 
Our visit to the university in Wuhan, one of China's major industrial 
cities along the Yangtze River, was a saddening experience. Some of the 
professors we met were American-educated. Although advanced in age and 
their English rusty, they were obviously men of erudition and quality. In 
the library, Ling, then a medical student, spoke to a young man who was 
reading an English-language biology textbook. She asked to see it and 
Chin a Beyond Beijing 619 
found that it was printed in the 1950s. She was incredulous. How could 
they be reading a biology book 30 years out of date? But they had been 
shut off for more than 30 years; having just opened up to the West, they 
had no foreign exchange to buy the latest textbooks and journals. And they 
had no photocopying machine. It would take a long time closing the 
knowledge gap that had widened between them and the developed world. 
The Cultural Revolution had set them back by a whole generation. The 
present students, recovering from the Cultural Revolution, were taught 
with outdated textbooks by teachers using outmoded teaching methods 
and without audiovisual aids. This would be another semilost generation. 
True, the most brilliant of them would make it regardless of the disadvan­
tages. But an industrial society requires a well-educated total population, 
not just the brilliant few. 
After the welcoming dinner in Wuhan, our host and all the officials 
accompanying us disappeared. We wondered what had happened and sent 
our aides to find out. They reported that they were all clustered around a 
television set in a sitting room, watching the Gang of Four in the dock, 
on trial. It was the moment of retribution for the people who had terror­
ized them for years now about to get their just desserts. We went to our 
guest drawing room to watch. It was a Chinese version of what I had read 
of Soviet trials in Stalin's time, except that no executions were expected 
and there were no long self-incriminating confessions. On the contrary, 
Jiang Qing, Mao's widow, looked defiant and ferocious, talking, almost 
screaming in a high-pitched, shrill voice, as she pointed to all her judges 
and berated them. When Mao was in charge, they were his dogs who 
barked when he told them to. How dare they sit in judgment over her! 
She was as bold and defiant a shrew as when she cracked the whip while 
Mao was alive. 
For the rest of our journey, the Gang of Four and their evil deeds were 
subjects of innumerable conversations between the Chinese officials and 
members of our party. Some had sad stories to tell of their experiences. It 
was frightening that an ancient civilization could be reduced to such 
madness, proudly referred to then as the Cultural Revolution. 
Other things had also gone wrong. A friendly senior provincial offi­
cial from Fujian, a southern province, accompanying me on a drive 
through Wuhan, pointed to a building nearing completion and said, tai zi 
620 From Third World to First 
lou, a high-rise building for "princes." I did not understand. He explained 
that "princes" meant the sons of important officials in the province and 
the city. He shook his head and said it was bad for morale, but there was 
little he coi_1ld do about it. Without saying so, he acknowledge d that it 
was a slide back to the old China where power had always meant privi­
lege, and privilege meant perks for family, relatives, and friends. 
Of the other stops, Xiamen and Gulangyu (Amoy and Kulangsu in 
the Fujian dialect) were memorable. For the first time in China, we heard 
the familiar dialect sounds of Singapore. I had spent years learning it to 
fight elections and it was a joy to hear them speak it the way I had been 
taught by my teacher, with the Xiamen accent of the prewar sophisticates 
in the Fujian province who came into contact with Western business­
people and missionaries. 
At Gulangyu, an island next to Xiamen, they showed us two bunga­
lows belonging to the Singapore government. They had been purchased 
by the colonial government before World War II to house British colonial 
officers sent to Amoy to learn Hokkien. What we saw were two dilapi­
dated buildings, each occupied by four or five families, many times the 
number of persons it was meant to house. They hastened to assure us that 
they would restore and return the buildings to us. (Hon Sui Sen, my 
finance minister, later told me he had heard horror stories of landlords 
who had taken back possession of their properties and been asked to pay 
arrears of salaries to caretakers for all the years since 1949.) Gulangyu was 
remarkable as a relic of European dominance. Every style of European 
architecture was represented. Some of the big houses were owned by 
wealthy overseas Chinese who had returned before the war to retire there. 
They had used French and Italian architects to build these once beautiful 
homes with curved staircases and banisters of travertine marble, and mar­
ble statues indoors and outdoors as if they were in Florence or Nice. 
Gulangyu must have been an oasis of luxury before the Japanese captured 
it in 1937 together with Shanghai. 
Our hosts pointed across the straits in the direction of Jinmen 
(Quemoy), an island under Taiwanese control. On a clear day it could be 
seen with the naked eye. That was exactly what President Chiang Ching­
kuo had told me earlier that year when he took me to Jinmen and pointed 
across the same stretch of water to Gulangyu. Only a few years ago, the 
Chin a Beyond Beijing 621 
Taiwanese had been sending over balloons from Jinmen to Gulangyu car­
rying food parcels, cassettes of Taiwan pop singers including Teresa Teng, 
their top-of-the-chart pop star, and propaganda leaflets. In the 1950s and 
1960s they had exchanged artillery barrages. In the 1980s, they traded 
insults over loudspeakers. 
The difference between the standards of living of Taipei in Taiwan 
and Xiamen in Fujian was stark. One was linked to the outside world, 
particularly America and Japan, with capital, technolog y, knowledge, for­
eign experts, and their own returned students from America and Japan 
building a modern economy. The other was plodding along, proud of its 
agricultural prowess based on knowledge of the 1950s and hardly any 
farm machinery, with deplorable communications and a low standard of 
living. 
The cuisine was familiar but different. At lunch they produced the 
original baobing (popiah), stir-fried shredded bamboo shoots wrapped in a 
pancake to make a spring roll with the necessary garnishes and condi­
ments. It was different from the Singapore version. They had all the 
familiar candies, such as delicious crushed peanut brittle, rolled up like a 
mini Swiss roll, tastier than what we had in Singapore. All of us knew this 
was where most of our ancestors came from. Wherever their village in 
Fujian province, for their journey to the South Seas, most would have 
come to Xiamen, the international settlement, to board the big ships that 
would take them south to Nanyang. 
From Xiamen we flew on to Guangzhou (Canton), then went back to 
Hong Kong by train. They had stopped the constant exhortations over 
loudspeakers, monotonous and repetitious speeches about the "capitalist 
roader" and other cliches of the Gang of Four. The Chinese were also less 
rigorous in their dress code. Once we left Beijing, the women interpreter s 
who accompanied us wore floral blouses with slacks or skirts, which they 
did not do in 1976. Maoist China was fading into history. The old habits 
of the Chinese would return; a few good ones, and more than a few bad 
ones, as we were to discover on my next visit in 1985-growing corrup­
tion, nepotism, and favoritism, the ills that have always beset China. 
This time we left with more favorable impressions. Our hosts were 
relaxed, enjoyed the meals and conversation, and were ready to talk of the 
disastrous decade of wen ge-their shorthand for wen hua da ge ming, the 
622 From Third World to First 
great Cultural Revolution. The leaders and officials we met were more 
open and at ease, willing to discuss their past mistakes and future prob­
lems. There were fewer of the slogans that used to be plastered all over 
Beijing and other cities, and of the giant square placards in rice and wheat 
fields. The few modest slogans now exhorted people to work hard for the 
Four Modernisations. They were becoming more natural, more like other 
societies. 
China's leaders were conscious of having lost a generation because of 
the Cultural Revolution. They had turned away from Mao's belief in per­
petual revolution. They wanted stable relations with other countries to 
get economic cooperation and help China recover. I thought it unlikely 
that there would be a modern China for another generation. 
Every province of China is different in geography, economy, education, 
and standard of efficiency . The preoccupations of their governors are dif­
ferent. I did not realize how dry, dusty, and barren north China was until I 
visited Dunhuang, the beginning of the Silk Road, to see the famous 
Buddhist grottoes which had been abandoned for many centuries. When 
the governor of Gansu province sent me on a camel ride to the "Singing 
Sands" not far from Dunhuang, I realized that we were on the edge of 
the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts. Their Bactrian camels were splendid 
double-humped shaggy creatures more elegant than the single-humped 
dromedary of the Arabian peninsula. The scenery with its high sand 
dunes was beautiful if bleak; but life was and still is hard. 
These tours showed us why provincial loyalties were strong in such a 
vast and densely populated country. Their accents, diets, and social habits 
vary. The elite could not know each other as well as their counterparts did 
in Europe, Japan, and the United States. America may be a continent, but 
the population is not as large, and excellent communications allowed 
their elite to meet and interact regularly. China is too populous, and until 
the 1980s when they built up their airports and imported Western air­
craft, communications were so poor that they lived in separate worlds. 
Hence every leader who rose to the top in Beijing brought with him as 
many of his provincial colleagues as was decent without arousing resent-
China Beyond Beijing 623 
ment from those excluded. Fellow provincials understood and could best 
read their leader's mind. 
There is strong interprovincial rivalry. Every governor will rattle off 
the basic statistics of his province-land area, population, cultivable land, 
rainfall, annual production of agriculture, industry services, and its rank­
ing among the 30 provinces for each individual item, including total 
GDP. There is equally keen intercity rivalry; each city mayor will recite 
its vital statistics and ranking among cities. The ranking is settled by the 
central government to encourage competition, which appears overkeen as 
leaders try to improve their position by all means, even resorting to trade 
wars. A fast-growing province such as Guangdong needed to import food 
for the influx of "floating" workers from other provinces; its neighbor 
would refuse to sell it grain. A province with a successful motorcycle 
manufacturing plant could not export its products to adjoining provinces 
that wanted to protect their own motorcycle plants. 
I had assumed that the communist system made for complete unified 
central control. This never was so in China. From the earliest dynasties, 
provincial authorities have enjoyed considerable independence in inter­
preting imperial edicts, and the further away from the center a province 
was, the greater its independence. Five words, shan gao, huang di yuan 
(mountains are high, the emperor is far away), express the cynicism and 
skepticism of generations of the disaffected who have been shortchanged 
by the local authorities. We were to have firsthand experience of this 
when we embarked on an ambitious project in the city of Suzhou in the 
1990s. 
I gained some insights into how their government works: cumber­
some and multilayered, with four layers of authority--central, provincial, 
city or county, and district. In theory, written directives from the center 
apply equally across a whole continent. In practice, their battles over turf 
are fierce and tenacious, each ministry jealously guarding its rights and 
trying to extend its powers. lntraministry contests and gridlocks are fre­
quent. There is no distinction between a civil servant and a political 
appointee. The Chinese Communist Party is supreme and anybody of any 
consequence must have a position in the party. To rise as an official or do 
well in private business, party membership is invaluable. 
624 From Third World to First 
The quality of the people in charge of China is impressive. With 
training and exposure to free-market economies, they could equal top 
executives in America, Western Europe, and Japan. They have capacious 
minds, analytical and quick on the uptake. Even in casual conversation 
the subtlety of their presentation shows a sharpness of intellect that can 
be fully appreciated only if one understands the Chinese language. 
I had expected this of the leaders in Beijing, but was surprised to dis­
cover the high caliber of their provincial officials, party secretaries, gover­
nors, mayors, and senior officials. The thick layer of talent spread over the 
continent is impressive. Those who get to the very top are not necessarily 
a class apart from those who just missed it. In a populous country like 
China, the luck of the draw plays a considerable part in getting to the top 
even though they have a careful and thorough process of selection, with 
the emphasis on ability and character, no longer on ideological purity or 
revolutionary fervor as during the disastrous years of the Cultural 
Revolution. 
One former activist gave me an insight into how the personnel sec­
tion of the Communist Party of China selects their top talent. Everyone 
has a file or dossier, which starts with his primary school report, contain­
ing not only his academic performance but his teachers' assessments of his 
character, behavior, values, and attitudes. At every stage of his career, 
there are records of judgments of his peers and superiors. At every level 
for promotion, all suitable candidates are assessed before appointment. At 
the top echelons of the pyramid is a core of between 5,000 and 10,000 
who have been chosen and carefully graded by the organization depart­
ment of the Communist Party, not the government. To ensure that grad­
ings are correct, inspection teams from the center visit provinces and 
cities to assess the assessors and interview an activist before he is pro­
moted. In case of disagreement, the matter would be reviewed in Beijing. 
The selection process is thorough, searching, and comprehensive. Finally, 
at the very top, promotion is done by the leader himself who has to judge 
not only the merit but also the loyalty of the candidate. It was Deng 
Xiaoping who chose Zhao Ziyang to be general secretary of the Com­
munist Party and nominally no. 1 in China. It was Deng who reversed his 
decision after Tiananmen in 1989. 
39. Tiananmen 
In May 1989, the world watched a bizarre drama unfold in Beijing. It was 
shown live on satellite television because the Western media were there in 
strength with their cameras in position to cover the Deng-Gorbachev 
summit. Students had gathered in large numbers in orderly fashion at 
Tiananmen Square in front of the Great Hall of the People. They carried 
banners and placards to protest against corruption, nepotism, and infla­
tion. The police were benign. The general secretary of the Chinese 
Communist Party (CCP) himself, Zhao Ziyang, made encouraging noises, 
that the students wanted the party and the government to reform, and 
had good intentions. As the crowds swelled, the banners and slogans 
became more critical, antigovernment, and strident. They started to 
denounce the government and Premier Li Peng by name. When nothing 
happened, they targeted Deng Xiaoping, ridiculing him in satirical dog­
gerel. When I saw this on television, I felt that this demonstration would 
end in tears. No emperor in China can be lampooned and ridiculed and 
continue to reign. 
Tiananmen was a strange episode in China's history. Li Peng was tele­
cast reading out the declaration of martial law. I watched excerpts of 
Beijing television relayed by satellite via Hong Kong to Singapore. One 
vivid premartial law episode showed representatives of the students in the 
Great Hall of the People arguing rudely with Premier Li Peng. They wore 
jeans and T-shirts. Li Peng was in an immaculately pressed Mao suit. The 
students scored heavily against Li Peng in that TV encounter. The drama 
626 From Third World to First 
reached a climax when soldiers tried to march into the square and were 
repulsed. Finally, on the night of 3 June, tanks and armored personnel 
carriers rolled in while the world watched on television. Some researchers 
who have sifted through the evidence were persuaded that there was actu­
ally no shooting in Tiananmen Square itself, that the shootings took place 
as troops accompanying the tanks and armored personnel carriers were 
forcing their way through the streets leading to the square. 
It was unbelievable . The People's Liberation Army (PLA) had turned 
its guns on its own people. I felt compelled to issue a statement the fol­
lowing day, 5 June: 
My cabinet colleagues and I are shocked, horrified and saddened 
by this disastrous turn of events. We had expected the Chinese 
government to apply the doctrine of minimum force when an 
army is used to quell civil disorder. Instead, the fire power and 
violence used caused many deaths and casualties. They were 
totally disproportionate to the resistance unarmed civilians 
offered. 
A China with large sections of her people, including her best­
educated, at odds with the government means trouble, with peo­
ple resentful, reforms stalled, and economy stagnant. Because of 
her size, such a China could create problems for herself and her 
neighbours in Asia. 
We hope wiser counsels will prevail to pursue conciliation, so 
that the Chinese people can resume the progress which the open­
door policies have brought them. 
I did not condemn them. I did not regard them as a repressive com­
munist regime like the Soviet Union. A certain momentum had been 
built up by those mass demonstrations in those two months. 
The reactions of ethnic Chinese communities in Hong Kong, Taiwan, 
and Singapore were markedly different. People in Hong Kong were dis­
tressed and terrified. They had watched the tragedy unfold on television 
almost 24 hours a day. They identified themselves with the students. 
Some Hong Kong youths had even camped with them in Tiananmen 
Square. That was a time when China had encouraged Hong Kong and 
Tiananmen 627 
Taiwan journalists and visitors to get closer to China. When the shooting 
took place, Hong Kongers were distraught at the prospect of coming 
under the control of such a cruel government. There were spontaneous 
outpourings of grief and rage. A million people took to the streets soon 
after the scenes appeared on television. For days, they continued demon­
strations outside the Xinhua News Agency, the unofficial PRC presence 
in Hong Kong. They helped protesters escape from the mainland through 
Hong Kong to the West. 
In Taiwan, there was sadness and sympathy for the students but not 
fear. There were no mass demonstrations of protest or grief. They were not 
about to be governed by China. 
Singaporeans were shocked. Few believed that such firepower was 
necessary, but nobody demonstr ated. People knew China was different, a 
communist country. A delegation of students from the universities pre­
sented a protest letter to the Chinese embassy. 
It was an instructive moment, highlightin g the different positions, 
perceptions and emotional involvement of these three groups of ethnic 
Chinese, placed in varying degrees of political proximity to communist 
China. 
But for his part in ordering the PLA to clear Tiananmen, Deng would 
have been eulogized in the West when he died in February 1997. Instead 
every obituary was laced with heavy criticism of the brutal crackdown on 
4 June and every TV soundbite included a playback of the same scenes of 
Tiananmen. I do not know how Chinese historians will evaluate his role. I 
consider Deng a great leader who changed the destiny of China and of the 
world. 
He was a realist, practical and pragmat ic, not ideological. Twice he 
had been purged by Mao, but he came back to power to save China. 
Twelve years before the Soviet Union collapsed he had known that the 
centrally planned economy did not work. He opened up China to free 
enterprise and the free market, starting with the special economic zones 
on the coast. Deng was the only leader in China with the political stand­
ing and strength to reverse Mao's policies. Like Mao, Deng fought to 
destroy the old China. But he did what Mao did not do. He built the new 
China, using free enterprise and the free market "with Chinese character­
istics." 
628 From Third World to First 
A veteran of war and revolution, he saw the student demonstrators at 
Tiananmen as a danger that threatened to throw China back into turmoil 
and chaos, prostrate for another 100 years. He had lived through a revolu­
tion and recognized the early signs of one at Tiananmen. Gorbache v, 
unlike Deng, had only read about revolution and did not recognize the 
danger signals of the Soviet Union's impending collapse. 
Twenty years after Deng's open-door policy, China shows every 
promise of becoming Asia's largest and most dynamic economy. If it 
avoids disorder and conflicts, either domestic or international, it will 
become a giant economy in 2030. When he died, Deng left the Chinese 
people a huge and promising legacy. But for him, the People's Republic of 
China would have collapsed as the Soviet Union did. If China had disinte­
grated, the Western media would have sympathized with the Chinese 
people as they have done with the Russians. Instead, the West has to 
weigh the prospect of a powerful China in 30 to 50 years. 
Three months after Tiananmen, on 24 August, Hu Ping, China's 
minister of commerce who had accompanied me on my provincial tour in 
1988, called on me. Premier Li Peng wanted him to brief me on the "6-4" 
incident ("6-4," June 4th, is a Chinese shorthand-they refer to big 
events by the month and day on which they occurred). The situation was 
now stable, but the impact on China had been great. During the 40 to 50 
days of turmoil, China had lost control of the situation. The students had 
used the problems of corruption and inflation to rally people to their 
cause. Their police lacked experience and were not able to deal with such 
demonstrations as they did not have water cannons and other riot control 
equipment. 
He said that by early June, the students had militarized themselves 
by robbing weapons and equipment from the PLA. (I had not read of 
this.) The troops tried to enter Tiananmen Square on 20 May but were 
obstructed. They were withdrawn and "re-educated." On 3 June, the 
troops began another push. Some were armed, but many were not. All had 
orders not to fire. In fact, the ammunition pouches of many of the troops 
contained biscuits. They had no rubber bullets. The day after the inci­
dent, he himself had toured Chang-An Road (road of eternal peace), the 
stretch from the Military Museum to the Diaoyutai guesthouse, and seen 
the smoking wrecks of 15 tanks and armored cars. The troops had acted 
Tiananmen 629 
with great restraint, abandoning their vehicles and firing shots into the 
air. His ministry was located near the square and he saw the million­
strong demonstration. In fact, 10 percent of the staff of his ministry and 
of other ministries had joined the demonstrators. They were also against 
corruption and were sympathetic to the students. Casualties, Hu Ping 
insisted, were caused when the troops were trying to get to Tiananmen 
Square, not in the square itself as the foreign press claimed. 
Since then, foreign businesspeople and their Chinese staff had 
returned to work. He believed that their foreign friends would gradually 
understand. Some young Chinese had links with an intelligence agency of 
a Western country and had spread Western opinions and information 
through advanced equipment. (I took this to mean the fax machine.) 
Although Western countries had now imposed sanctions, China would 
never allow foreign interference in its internal affairs. But most of these 
countries, including international banks, had not taken sanctions further. 
Contacts were being restored. He hoped Singapore-China bilateral rela­
tions would stay good because they were on firm foundations. 
"6-4" was a shock to me and the people of Singapore, I replied. We 
had not expected to see the use of such tremendous firepower and force. 
We were accustomed to seeing on television, almost nightly, clashes 
between South Korean police and workers and students, white South 
African police beating up blacks, and Israelis using tear gas, rubber bul­
lets, and other weapons against Palestinians, with occasionally one or two 
deaths; tanks and armored cars were never used. Singaporeans could not 
believe what they had seen-a Chinese government that had been so rea­
sonable, forbearing, and tolerant in May, suddenly turned brutal, using 
tanks against civilians. Singaporeans, especially ethnic Chinese, could not 
understand this and felt deeply shamed by such an uncivilized action. 
There were deep mental scars. 
China had to explain to Singapore and the world why it was necessary 
for the demonstrations to be put down in this way, why there was no 
other way. To go overnight from "soft" to "hard" was not explicable. 
China's real problem was not with countries in Southeast Asia, which had 
neither the wealth nor technology to help China modernize. Its problem 
was with the United States, Japan, and Europe. The United States espe­
cially, through the World Bank and the IMF, had done China many good 
630 From Third World to First 
turns. China had to erase the bad impression it had created. I suggested 
they get some American public relations firm to help in this task. 
Americans were an emotional people. Television had a tremendous impact 
on them. Senators and members of Congress controlled the president and 
money; China must pay close attention to them. Fortunately for China, 
President Bush had lived in China for several years and knew it better 
than most Americans. He had been trying to calm down Congress. 
I cautioned that if China stopped sending students abroad because of 
the added problems they had caused through faxing their ideas to their 
friends in Beijing, China would shut itself off from knowledge and tech­
nology. The loss would be incalculable. 
He assured me that their policies on students and on opening up 
would not change. Many businesspeople from Taiwan were coming in to 
invest. Their policy toward Hong Kong and Taiwan also would not 
change. But the situation in Hong Kong was more complicated, he said. 
The slogans people had coined in Hong Kong had changed from "Hong 
Kong people rule Hong Kong" to "Hong Kong people save Hong Kong." 
He did not refer to the enormous outpouring of fear and sympathy in street 
processions of a million Hong Kong people in protest against "6-4." 
A sad memory I have of Tiananmen Square, packed with demonstra­
tors sporting slogans on headbands, is of Zhao with a megaphone, almost 
in tears, pleading with the students to disperse, telling them that he 
could no longer protect them. That was on 19 May. It was too late. The 
CCP leaders had decided to declare martial law and use force if necessary 
to break up the demonstrations. At that stage, the students had either to 
disperse or be forcibly removed. Zhao had not shown that toughness 
needed in the leader of a China on the verge of luan (chaos). Orderly pro­
testers had been allowed to become defiant rebels. If not firmly dealt 
with, they could have triggered off similar disorder throughout the vast 
country. Tiananmen is not London's Trafalgar Square. 
Communist China has adopted the Soviet practice of the "nonperson." 
However powerful a leader has been, once he is out he becomes a nonper­
son and is never mentioned in public. Although I would have liked to 
meet Zhao Ziyang on my later visits to China, I could not raise the sub­
ject. A few years after Tiananmen, I met one of his sons and was given a 
glimpse of what life had been like for Zhao and his family after his fall 
Tiananmen 631 
from grace. Zhao had had to move out of Zhongnanhai, where all party 
leaders lived, to a house occupied by Hu Yaobang (the former general sec­
retary of the party) when Hu was a director of the organization depart­
ment of the CCP. For the first few years, Zhao had a sentry at the entrance 
and his movements were monitored. Later, the surveillance was relaxed. 
He could play golf at a Chinese-owned golf course in a Beijing suburb but 
not on a foreign joint-venture golf course. He could visit inland but not 
coastal provinces, to minimize contact with foreigners and the resulting 
publicity. Zhao's children were overseas, except for one daughter who 
worked in a Beijing hotel. His living conditions were comfortable. His 
family could visit him. By Soviet standards of treatment for nonpersons, 
he was not badly off. He was better-treated than Krushchev had been by 
Brezhnev, or Gorbachev by Yeltsin. 
The man who publicly carried the international and domestic odium for 
the declaration of martial law and the forcible dispersal of the crowd at 
Tiananmen was Premier Li Peng. In fact, the decision was made by Deng, 
supported by several of the Long March veterans. I first met Li Peng in 
Beijing in September 1988. He had taken over as premier from Zhao 
Ziyang who had become general secretary. Li was not as outgoing as Zhao. 
A Russian-trained engineer in his mid-sixties, he had a good, capacious 
mind and was always well-brief ed and careful with his words. He was not 
the back-slapping type and could take offense when none was intended. I 
adjusted to his temperament and we got on. After I came to know him 
better, I found him a sensible if conservative man. 
He is the son of a leading communist and had been adopted by 
Premier Zhou Enlai. He has no provincial accent at all, because he lived 
where the CCP headquarters were, with the Zhou family in Yenan, and 
later in Beijing. His wife is more outgoing, an easy conversationalist with 
an attractive personality. Unlike most Chinese leaders' wives who kept in 
the background, she frequently played hostess. She spoke English for 
social purposes. Choo found it easy to talk to her in English without 
interpreters. 
At our formal discussion, Li Peng asked about Singapore's business 
developments in China. I said Singapore investors faced many difficulties. 
632 From Third World to First 
Too many had lost money and become discouraged. The word had got 
around that there was confusion in China, so investments had slowed 
down. They could not understand why Chinese managers and supervisors 
could not exercise discipline over Chinese workers. Singapore- and Hong 
Kong-owned hotels needed to employ their own Chinese as supervisors to 
discipline the staff. Even so, there were problems. For instance, workers 
fired for removing materials from a hotel had to be reinstated because 
other workers created trouble. Labor relations had to change if China 
wanted progress. They should allow investors to manage their own enter­
prises, including hiring and firing workers. 
He replied that foreign investors were welcome to make money, but 
China's policy was to ensure that they did not make too much money. (I 
took this to mean that, whatever might have been agreed, if in their opin­
ion profits were too high, they would find some way of making the divi­
sion of profits more equitable .) China's taxation policies in the special eco­
nomic zones were better than those in Hong Kong. But he admitted that 
foreign investors faced low efficiency in the government and much red 
tape. China had great difficulty solving this. Many state-owned enter­
prises were overstaffe d and making losses. They had to care for retired 
workers. With the free market, China's wage system had become absurd. 
A senior professor in a well-known university had a salary of about 400 
yuan. The professor's daughter, an attendant in a foreign enterprise, re­
ceived as much. No one could say that the contribution of the daughter 
was as large as that of the father. The entire wage system would have to be 
changed, but he could not raise the salary of the professor because the 
government had insufficient resources. China had achieved much since it 
initiated the policy of opening up to the outside world, he said, but infla­
tion had been very high and had to be controlled by slowing down the 
rate of investments in construction. China would not reverse the reforms. 
He was confident they would overcome their difficulties. 
Asked for an assessment of the security situation in East Asia, I 
painted an optimistic picture of growth and stability, provided there were 
no security upsets. The Soviet Union was contained by both the United 
States and China. The U.S. policy was to co-opt Japan with its economic 
strength to supplement its own while providing security for Japan. As 
long as this arrangement prevailed, there was no need for Japan to rearm. 
Tiananmen 633 
Japan did not have nuclear capability, but it was possible that Japan 
would go it alone if the United States proved no longer dependable. In 
that case, the threat to all countries in Southeast Asia would increase. 
Most Japanese leaders of the older generation wanted to continue this 
partnership with the United States which had brought them prosperity 
and the good life. There was a danger that a younger generation of lead­
ers, having no experience of the last war, might think differently , espe­
cially if they revived their myth that they were descendants of the sun 
goddess. 
Li Peng thought I had underestimated the Japanese danger. China 
had to be vigilant over the resurrection of the Japanese military. Despite 
Japan's self-imposed ceiling of 1 percent of GNP, its military expenditure 
was some US$26--27 billion more than China's. There were some 
Japanese leaders who wanted to reverse the verdict of history that Japan 
had committed aggression against China, Southeast Asia, and the South 
Pacific. He cited two examples: the way they wrote their textbooks and 
visits to Yasukuni shrine by top Japanese leaders. (The Yasukuni shrine 
honors soldiers who died in war.) Japan's economic success had created the 
wherewithal to make it a major political and military power. At least 
some Japanese leaders were thinking along those lines. His concern at a 
possible revival of Japanese militarism was real. At the same time, China 
"was consistently on guard" against danger from the Soviet Union. 
Two years later, on 11 August 1990, Premier Li Peng visited Singa­
pore. He had just reestablished Sino-Indonesian diplomatic relations in 
Jakarta. We met with only note takers and an interpreter. I had said on 
many past occasions that Singapore would be the last country in Asean to 
establish diplomatic relations with China. Now that Indonesia had 
restored diplomatic relations, I wanted to resolve this before I stepped 
down as prime minister in November that year. Li Peng noted that dur­
ing my long years as prime minister, relations between Singapore and 
China had developed well. He too would like to settle this matter before I 
stepped down. Hence, he invited me to visit China in mid-October. 
I then referred to the issue that had bogged down discussions at the 
official level on the agreement to exchange embassies--our troops train­
ing in Taiwan. I did not see a final date for our training there. Singapore 
was deeply indebted to Taiwan, in particular to the late President Chiang 
634 From Third World to First 
Ching-kuo who had enabled us to break out of our limited space for mili­
tary training. We could not forget our debt. We paid only for what we 
consumed or used and had not paid a single extra dollar. It was a special 
relationship. We felt close to each other because we were both noncom­
munists and shared the same language, culture, and ancestry. Li expressed 
understanding of our position, that Singapore was prosperous but not big. 
Finally, he said China would not insist on a specific time frame for 
Singapore training in Taiwan to end. 
After that meeting, a thorny issue over which negotiations had been 
stalled for many months was on its way to resolution. Unlike in 1976, I 
was no longer concerned that a Chinese embassy in Singapore could pose 
problems for our security. Our domestic conditions had changed. We had 
solved some basic problems in Chinese education. All our schools had 
converted to a national system with English as their medium of instruc­
tion. Nanyang University no longer taught in Chinese and its graduates 
could easily find employment . We had stopped breeding successive gen­
erations of disadvantaged graduates. 
At a full delegation meeting after our discussion , Li referred to 
Tiananmen as the "turmoil in China last summer." Some countries had 
imposed sanctions that caused China some difficulties but also hurt them­
selves. The Japanese had eased their sanctions after the G-7 meeting. I said 
that, unlike the Western media, Singapore did not consider Tiananmen to 
be the end of the world, but it was a great pity that China had lost out in 
public relations. Li said, "The Chinese government lost total control of the 
situation. " As premier, he "could not even go into the streets. This chaos 
lasted for 48 days." 
Li Peng is not a man for lighthearted jests. That day he surprised 
everyone when he said he would like to "crack a joke" on our troop train­
ing in Taiwan: They could train in China on terms better than in Taiwan. 
There was a burst of spontaneous laughter around the table. When that 
day arrived, I said, peace would have broken out in Asia. 
Two months later, I paid my last visit to Beijing as prime minister, to 
formalize and establish diplomatic relations on 3 October. After this was 
done, we discussed the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. Li Peng said Iraq 
could not be defeated easily in a blitzkrieg. (When with sophisticated 
Tiananmen 635 
weaponry Desert Storm tore through Iraq's defenses in a matter of days, it 
must have come as a surprise to China's civil and military leaders.) 
He disclosed that a few weeks hefore our meeting, at Vietnam's 
request, its leaders, Nguyen Van Linh (premier), Do Muoi (party secre­
tary), and Pham Van Dong (senior leader and former prime minister who 
had visited Singapore in 1978), had held talks in Chengdu, Sichuan 
province, with General Secretary Jiang Zemin and him. They had agreed 
that Vietnam would unconditionally withdraw from Cambodia under 
UN supervision, and that a national security council would govern 
Cambodia until the elections. China was now ready to improve relations 
with Vietnam. 
In October 1990, I met President Jiang Zemin. He received me warmly, 
quoting from the Analects of Confucius: "It is a pleasure to receive friends 
from afar." He had missed me when he visited Singapore in the early 
1980s, and when I visited Shanghai in 1988 when he was mayor there. 
He had visited Singapore twice, on the first occasion for two weeks to 
study how the Economic Development Board (EDB) got investments into 
Singapore and how we developed industrial estates. He was then tasked 
with setting up special economic zones in Guangdong and Fujian. The 
second visit was a transit stop. He had carried away a deep impression of 
Singapore's city planning, orderliness, traffic conditions, cleanliness, and 
standard of service. He remembered our slogan, "Courtesy is our way of 
life." He was pleased he could speak Mandarin with ordinary people in 
the streets, which made it easy for him to get around. 
Jiang said that after the "6-4" incident, the West claimed that 
through television it was possible for them to interfere in Chinese affairs. 
The West acted in accordance with their value system. He could accept 
that there were different views, but not that only one view was correct. 
There was nothing absolute in these concepts of democracy , freedom, and 
human rights. They could not exist in abstraction, but were linked to a 
country's culture and level of economic development. There was no such 
thing as freedom of the press. Western newspapers belonged to and were 
controlled by various financial groups. He referred to Singapore's decision 
636 From Third World to First 
in 1988 to restrict the sales of the Asian Wall Street Journal and said China 
should have done the same during Gorbachev's visit. Many Western 
media reports on the "6-4" incident were not accurate. 
Deng's policy of opening to the world and adhering to socialism 
remained unchanged. Since I had expressed concern about the continu­
ance of this open-door policy, Jiang assured me that it would be "acceler­
ated." They had decided to break away from the Soviet centrally planned 
system. He had studied in the Soviet Union for two years and visited the 
country on 10 occasions, so he knew the difficulties of their system. China 
wanted to establish a mixed economy, to combine the best of the centrally 
planned economy and market regulation. 
China wanted to maintain contact with other countries. It faced diffi­
culties in feeding 1.1 billion people. It was an enormous effort to supply 
the whole country with grain alone. As mayor of Shanghai, with a popula­
tion of 12 million, he had found it difficult to supply 2 million kilos of 
vegetables daily. For an hour he spoke of China's colossal needs. At dinner 
the conversation was lively. He would quote couplets and verses from his 
immense mental anthology memorized since childhood. His comments 
were peppered with literary allusions, many beyond my limited knowl­
edge of Chinese literature, which added to the work of the interpreter. 
Instead of the stereotyped grey communist apparatchik that I had 
expected, I found a medium-height, stocky, fair, bespectacled, broad­
faced, black hair combed straight back, ready-smiling party chairman. He 
was the No. 1 man in China, chosen by Deng Xiaoping in a matter of 
days after "6-4" to take the place of Zhao Ziyang. He was highly intelli­
gent and well-read and had a gift for languages. He was fluent in Russian, 
spoke English and German, and could quote Shakespeare and Goethe. He 
told me he also spoke Romanian, having worked in Romania. 
Jiang was born in 1926 into a scholarly family in Yangzhou town, 
Jiangsu province. His grandfather was a renowned physician and a tal­
ented poet, painter, and calligrapher. His father was the eldest son. An 
uncle who had joined the Communist Youth League at 17 and been killed 
at 28 in the civil war against the Nationalists in 1939 was considered a 
revolutionary martyr. His father gave Jiang Zemin, then 13, to the widow 
of this uncle who had no son. So Jiang had impeccable revolutionary 
Tiananmen 
antecedents when he joined the communist student groups in the univer­
sities in Nanjing and Jiaotong in Shanghai. 
He was brought up in a home with books, paintings, and music. Jiang 
sings, plays the piano, and enjoys listening to Mozart and Beethovt:n. 
There were significant differences in academic performance between peo­
ple of the various provinces. Jiangsu was the "Lake District" of Uuna 
where, over the millennia, its pleasant microclimate had attracted retired 
mandarins and literati. Their progeny have raised the academic level ot Lhe 
population there. Suzhou inJiangsu province, once the capital of one ot the 
states in the Spring Autumn period (about 770-476 B.C.), has one street 
called Zhuang Yuan Jie. Zhuan g Yuan was the title given to the candidate 
who came first in the imperial examinations that used to be held in the 
capital city once every three years. Suzhou leaders proudly claim that quite 
a number of them came from that street. 
Although I had been well-brief ed, Jiang was a surprise. I had not 
expected to find so extroverted a Chinese communist leader. When Jiang 
spent two weeks in Singapore in 1980, Ng Pock Too, an EDB director, 
was his liaison officer. After Jiang was made general secretary, Ng gave 
me a thumbnail sketch. He was surprised Jiang had been placed in this 
top position. He remembered him as a serious, hardworking, conscien­
tious, and thorough official: Jiang would study every problem in detail, 
take notes, and ask searching questions. Ng thought highly of him 
because, unlike other Chinese officials who stayed in five-star hotels, 
Jiang chose a three-star hotel off fashionable Orchard Road. He travellc:d 
modestly-in Ng's car, by taxi, or on foot. Jiang was a thrifty, honest offi­
cial, but did not appear to be a political animal. 
Toward the end of the two weeks, Jiang had looked Ng Pock Too m 
the eye and said, "You have not told me everything. You must have a 
secret. China has cheaper land, cheaper water, cheaper power, cheaper 
labour. Yet you get so many investments and we don't. What is the secret 
formula?" Nonplussed, Ng explained the key importance of political con­
fidence and economic productivity. He pulled out his copy of the Business 
Environment Risk Index (BERi) report, and pointed out Singapore's rat­
ing as IA on a scale of IA down to 3C. China was not even included in 
the rating. Singapore was safe and favored for investments because of safe 
638 From Third World to First 
political, economic, and other factors. There was no danger of confisca­
tion. Our workers were industrious and productive , and there were mini­
mal strikes. Our currency was convertible. He went through the BERI 
measurements . Jiang was not altogether convinced, so he gave Jiang the 
BERi report to take home. They had a summing-up discussion in Jiang's 
small hotel room before they left for the airport. Jiang finally said he 
understood the magic formula, that the EDB had the "unique knowhow 
to sell confidence "! Ng concluded, "I never thought he would be the 
No. 1 man in China. He was too nice." 
Our personal chemistry was good. Jiang was gregarious. I was open 
and direct. Whereas with Li Peng I had to be careful not to speak even 
half in jest, Jiang knew I meant well and did not take offense. He also had 
a very un-Chinese habit of holding his guest's forearm and looking him 
earnestly in the eye when he asked a direct question. His eyes were his lie 
detector. I assumed he must have been satisfied that I was not being eva­
sive when he asked some very probing questions about Taiwan, America, 
and the West, and about China itself. 
Personal chemistry does make a difference to the ease with which 
business can be done on difficult and sensitive issues. I could not have 
talked as freely with either Hua Guofeng or Li Peng as I did with Jiang 
Zemin. It might have been possible with Zhao Ziyang, but not in the 
same free-ranging manner. 
Many, myself included, underrated Jiang's staying power because of 
his bonhomie and his penchant for quoting poetry at every opportuni ty. 
But there must be a tough infighter side of him that his opponents would 
have discovered to their detriment when they thwarted him. There is no 
question about his integrity and dedication to the high cause placed upon 
him by Deng Xiaoping, to carry China's modernization forward and make 
China a prosperous, industrial society with "a socialist market economy." 
He explained its meaning to me at some length, that China had to be dif­
ferent from a Western free-market economy because the Chinese were 
socialists. 
When I met Jiang again two years later, in October 1992, we talked 
about the international situation. It was a few weeks before the U.S. elec­
tions. I suggested China would need to buy time for itself if Clinton won. 
He should give Clinton room to maneuvre and do a U-turn on some of his 
Tiananmen 639 
policies, like China's Most Favored Nation status, to avoid a head-on con­
frontation. A new, young president eager to show his supporters that he 
was ready to live up to his election speeches could result in problems for 
both China and America. 
Jiang listened. He answered indirectly. He had read my speeches, 
those delivered in China and elsewhere. During Deng's tour of the south­
ern provinces in January that year, Deng had referred to the rapid devel­
opment of Southeast Asia and especially Singapore. The 14th party con­
gress to be held the following month would carry out Deng's policy of 
"socialism with Chinese characteristics. " For this, China needed a peaceful 
and stable international and internal environment. The market economy 
would expand in China but would take a long time. As for democracy for 
China, the East had been influenced by the teachings of Confucim rmd 
Mencius. Any "shock treatment " (of sudden democracy) for China, like 
that in the Soviet Union, was out. As for the present unhappy state of 
U.S.-China relations, the fault was not China's. By selling fighter planes 
and weapons to Taiwan, America had violated the principles of the 1982 
communique agreed between China and the United States. But China had 
not made a big issue of it because it did not want to embarrass President 
Bush during his election campaign. 
He described China's economic situation. Then he asked me what 
would be the most satisfactory rate of GNP growth for China. Their pre­
vious target was 6 percent. In the next congress, their proposed target was 
8 or 9 percent. The four Little Dragons and Japan, I replied, had achieved 
double-digit growth with little inflation for sustained periods during the 
early phases of their industrialization. Before the oil crisis, Singapore had 
achieved 12 to 14 percent growth rates with little inflation. The opti­
mum rate of growth for Singapore did not depend on any magic figure, 
but on how much of our labor and production capacity was underused and 
also on our rates of interest and inflation. I added that Dr. Goh Keng 
Swee (my former finance minister, who had been advising the Chinese on 
their special economic zones) believed China's most important problem 
was the inability of the People's Bank of China (PBOC), their central 
bank, to control credit. Each PBOC branch in the provinces responded to 
pressure from provincial governments when creating credit. Furthermore, 
data on money supply at any given time was insufficient. China had to 
640 From Third World to First 
control money supply to keep inflation under control, and not allow the 
provincial branches of the PBOC to create credit without the knowledge 
and permission of the central bank. 
He made a note of this. He said he had graduated as an electrical 
engineer but had begun to learn economics and was reading the works of 
Adam Smith, Paul Samuelson, and Milton Friedman . He was not the only 
Chinese leader studying market economics. I advised him to study the 
workings of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank and the German Bundesbank, 
two successful central banks. Of the two, the Bundesbank had been more 
successful in fighting inflation. The chairman of the Bundesbank was 
appointed by the chancellor , but once appointed he had independence and 
the chancellor could not order him to increase money supply or lower 
interest rates. China must get credit creation under control and not be 
overconcerned about not exceeding a putative ideal rate of growth. For 
example, if Guangdong province could grow faster than other provinces 
because of inputs from Hong Kong, then he should let it do so, and 
encourage that growth to spread to neighboring provinces through 
improved road, rail, air, river, and sea transportation. He said he would 
study these points. 
When I next met Jiang in Beijing in May 1993, he thanked me for 
having facilitated the Wang-Koo talks in Singapore between "unofficial" 
representatives of China and Taiwan. It was the first time since 1949 that 
the two sides of the civil war had met, albeit "unofficially ." Jiang said, 
however, that he felt "very strange and disappointed " with the numerous 
reports that Taiwan wanted to join the UN. He thought it was unwise for 
the West to treat China as a potential enemy. 
I said that Taiwan's push to join the UN was not encouraged by the 
United States. Dick Cheney, the former U.S. secretary for defense under 
Reagan until 1992, and Jeanne Kirkpatrick, the former U.S. permanent 
representative to the UN, also under Reagan, had said in Taipei recently 
that it was not realistic for Taiwan to join the UN, that Taiwan could join 
UNESCO, the World Bank, and other technical organizations, but not 
the UN itself. I believed Taiwan's wish to join the UN was a passing 
phase with President Lee Teng-hui, who wanted to break away from the 
old KMT position, which was not to join any international body because 
Taiwan was not a full member of the UN. (I was to discover later that I 
Tiananmen 641 
was wrong; it was not a passing phase. Lee Teng-hui really hoped to join 
the UN and to assert Taiwan's separateness as the Republic of China on 
Taiwan.) 
The best outcome of China-Taiwan relations, I believed, was a peace­
ful and gradual interlocking of economic, social, and political relations 
between the two. For example, in 1958 the mainland had exchanged 
artillery fire with Taiwan across the narrow Straits of Quemoy and Matsu. 
If China had succeeded in reuniting with Taiwan then, China would now 
be in a less advantageous position. Because it did not, it could now tap 
the resources of some 20 million Taiwanese who had acquired economic 
and technological assets through their association with America. He nod­
ded in agreement. Would it not be better to have Taiwan carry on as a 
separate entity, I suggested. Then America and Europe would continue to 
let Taiwan have access to their technology and know-how for another 40 
to 50 years, and China could benefit further from what Taiwan could put 
into the mainland. He shook his head in disagreement. 
I next argued that if he wanted the United States to have less lever­
age, he should open up China to more European MNCs. Then American 
businesspeople would lobby their government against actions that jeopar­
dized their interests in China for fear of losing out to European and 
Japanese MNCs. He thought this a good point. I added that America and 
Europe could not tolerate another Japanese-style dosed-market economy 
in a China that only exported and did not import. For China to develop, it 
must use its potentially huge market to attract foreign investors who can 
sell their products in China and thus "lock them into China's growth." 
Jiang agreed that as a big country it was not realistic to have a wholly 
export-oriented economy. China must increase its exports, but not to the 
United States alone, and China had to develop an open market. He agreed 
more with the view of Vice Premier Li Lanqing (in charge of trade) than 
with that of Vice Premier Zhu Rongji (in charge of industries). Zhu held 
the view that local industries must have a certain degree of protection. 
Jiang said China's policy was to learn from various countries and pick up 
their strong points, not only in know-how, science, and technology but 
also in cultural experience. 
One animated meeting I had with Jiang was in October 1994, about 
Taiwan. Earlier that year, in May, Taiwan's President Lee Teng-hui had 
642 From Third World to First 
stopped over in Singapore to ask Prime Minister Goh to convey a proposal 
to President Jiang. This was to set up an international shipping company, 
to be jointly owned by the PRC, Taiwan, and Singapore (with only a 
nominal Singapore shareholding), to handle trade between China and 
Taiwan. All ships trading with the PRC would be put under this com­
pany. 
Goh had written to Jiang to convey the proposal. Jiang had not 
accepted it. Then Goh and I had decided to put up a Singapore proposal 
to bridge the gulf between the two, by forming a company for both ship­
ping and airline, to be registered in Singapore and jointly owned by the 
PRC, Taiwan, and Singapore in more or less equal shares. This company 
would wet-charter ships and aircraft (lease ships and aircraft with their 
full crew complement) in equal numbers from China and Taiwan. After 
three years, the two would buy out Singapore's share. President Lee had 
agreed to this proposal when we met in Taiwan in mid-September 1994. 
I met Jiang a few days later, on 6 October, in the Great Hall of the 
People. He proposed that we talk in a small group, he with his deputy 
director, state council (Taiwan affairs), I with our ambassador. Jiang said, 
"I have an interpreter but let us not waste time. You'll speak in English, I 
can understand you. I'll speak in Chinese, you can understand me, and 
when you don't, my interpreter will help." We did save time. 
President Lee, I said, had agreed to our proposal but believed there 
would be many difficulties in the details, so he would want Singapore to 
be involved in resolving them. The Taiwanese foreign minister wanted 
the shipping line to start first. They had designated a special zone at 
Kaohsiung as their international transit cargo port. After it had been run 
successfully for a year, the airline could start. 
Jiang said Prime Minister Goh's proposal had been made with good 
intentions, but was not appropriate. There was no reason for any camou­
flage for the two sides to get together. He had heard these same views 
from many sources. He then referred to Lee Teng-hui's interview with 
Ryotaro Shiba, published in a Japanese magazine in April. (In it, Lee had 
referred to himself as Moses leading his people out from Egypt to the 
Promised Land.) Jiang added that Lee's attempt to attend the Hiroshima 
Asian Games showed him as totally unreliable. Lee wanted two Chinas, or 
one China and one Taiwan. The more talks there had been, the wider the 
Tiananmen 643 
gap between them. Lee had been saying one thing and doing another. Lee 
should not assume that he O iang) was a fool and could not read his true 
position. China's leaders weighed their words carefully and stood by 
them, he said, suggesting Taiwan's leaders did not. China's leaders placed 
great importance on trust and righteousness, he said, implying Lee did 
not have these qualities. Jiang showed anger when he said that Lee was 
cozying up to his former colonial masters (meaning Japan). 
He was in such full flow that even when I did not understand specific 
phrases he used and only caught the gist of his meaning, I did not stop 
him for clarification. He spoke with great passion, to underline the seri­
ousness of his position and the depth of his convictions. 
At the time, I did not understand his controlled anger. Later, I discov­
ered that three days before our meeting, while I was in Henan province, 
President Lee had said in the Asian Wall Street Journal, "There is no leader 
strong enough in Beijing, nobody able to give the final say. Deng 
Xiaoping is still around, but we don't think he is in any condition to 
exercise his brains. Mr. Deng had tried to establish Jiang Zemin as top 
leader wearing all the hats .... After Mr. Deng has gone, we may find the 
true leader taking the stage. We don't know if there is someone we can see 
now or someone hiding who will come out." 
40. China: To Be Rich Is Glorious 
Deng Xiaoping went on a well-publicized tour of south China in 
February 1992. At Shenzhen he said that Guangdong should catch up 
with Asia's Four Dragons (Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and 
Taiwan) in 20 years, not only in economics but also in social order and 
social climate. China should do better than these countries in these mat­
ters. Only then would it have the distinguishing characteristics of 
Chinese socialism. Deng added, "There is good social order in Singapore. 
They govern the place with discipline. We should draw from their expen­
ence, and do even better than them." In China, commendation from Deng 
was the ultimate word on what was good. 
I had told Deng over dinner in 1978 in Singapore that we, the 
Singapore Chinese, were the descendants of illiterate landless peasants 
from Guangdong and Fujian in south China, whereas the scholars, man­
darins, and literati had stayed and left their progeny in China. There was 
nothing that Singapore had done that China could not do, and do bettt:r. 
He stayed silent then. When I read that he had told the Chinese people co 
do better than Singapore, I knew he had taken up the challenge I quietly 
tossed to him that night 14 years earlier. 
After Deng's endorsement, several hundred delegations, most of them 
unofficial, came from China armed with tape recorders, video cameras, 
and notebooks to learn from our experience. Singapore had been given the 
imprimatur of their supreme leader. They put us under their microscopes 
and studied those parts they considered attractive and wanted to repro-
646 From Third World to First 
duce in their cities. I wondered what my communist adversaries of the 
1960s, the Plen, the Malayan Communist Party leader in Singapore, and 
Lim Chin Siong, the communist united front leader, would say. The 
Chinese Communist Party had been their source of inspiration. 
China's leaders had been troubled by the "social pollution "-prolifer­
ating prostitution, pornography, drugs, gambling, and crime-in the 
special economic zones. Ideological purists criticized the wisdom of the 
open-door policy. Deng's answer was that when windows were opened, 
with the fresh air some flies and mosquitoes were bound to fly in, but 
they could be dealt with. 
Soon after Deng's speech, the head of the International Liaison 
Department of the Chinese Communist Party asked our ambassador in 
Beijing if we would brief them on "how we had maintained strong moral 
standards and social discipline. " Specifically, they wanted to know "if 
Singapore had experienced contradictions in the process of absorbing 
Western technology that was needed to develop the economy, and how to 
maintain social stability." They had been observing us for some years. 
Reports had been appearing in their media commending Singapore for its 
infrastructure, housing estates, cleanliness, orderliness, and greenness, its 
social stability and harmony, and the courtesy of its people. 
A delegation led by their vice minister of propaganda, Xu Weicheng, 
came for a 10-day briefing. "Vice minister of propaganda" was a mis­
nomer: He was actually vice minister of ideology. We explained our belief 
that social control could not depend on discipline alone. People had to 
have a decent life with reasonable housing and social amenities if they 
were to lead moral and upright lives. They had to accept the basic princi­
ples of our system of government, like obeying the law and observing 
their duty to help the police in the prevention and investigation of crime. 
The delegation visited all departments connected with social order­
the police (especially those sections dealing with drugs, prostitution, and 
gambling); the agencies in charge of censorship of undesirable videos, 
films, books, and magazines; newspaper offices and radio and TV stations 
to ask about their role in informing and educating the public; and the 
NTUC and the People's Association to see organizations that catered to 
workers. 
I met Xu at the end of his visit. He told me he was interested in how 
Chin a: To Be Rich Is Glorious 647 
we had used the free market to achieve rapid economic growth; how we 
had blended Western and Eastern culture as we absorbed Western science 
and technology; and, most important, how we maintained racial harmony. 
His delegation was responsible for ideology and wanted to learn how to 
eradicate social vices. 
We were candid about the problems we could not solve. Vices such as 
prostitution, gambling, drug addiction, and alcoholism could only be 
controlled, not eradicated. Singapore's history as a seaport meant prostitu­
tion had to be managed and confined to certain areas of the city where the 
women were given regular health checks. Gambling was impossible to 
suppress. It was an addiction Chinese migrants had carried with them 
wherever they settled. But we had eliminated the triads or secret societies 
and broken up organized crime. 
As for corruption, Xu expressed his doubts whether agencies like 
Singapore 's Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau and the commercial 
affairs department could deal with the large "grey areas" in a society like 
China where guanxi (personal relationships) was all-pervasive. The defini­
tion of corruption in China was different. Moreover , he stressed, the party 
was supreme and its members could only be disciplined internally within 
the party. (This meant that some 60 million party members are not sub­
ject to the ordinary law of the land of China. Since then several very senior 
party activists have been sentenced to death for smuggling, and others to 
long prison terms for corruption. But the party leaders can intervene and 
reverse judicial decisions.) Xu said that not all Singapore 's methods could 
be replicated as China's system was very different. Perhaps small new cities 
like Shenzhen could usefully follow Singapore's experience. China would 
always remain socialist. Their only way was to try out policies one at a 
time, for unlike Singapore, China had to adapt its policies to differing 
conditions in its 30 provinces. 
He was struck by our clean and efficient administration. How had we 
preserved the people's social and moral values? All we did, I replied, was to 
reinforce the cultural assets the people had, their inherited values and sense 
of right and wrong. Confucian virtues such as being filial to one's parents, 
honest and upright, hardworking and thrifty, sincere to one's friends, and 
loyal to the country were important supports for the legal system. We re­
inforced these traditional values by rewarding behavior that conformed to 
648 From Third World to First 
them and punishing contrary behavior. At the same time, we set out to 
eradicate such weaknesses as nepotism, favoritism, and corruption, which 
were the dark side of Chinese Confucianism-the obligation to help one's 
family. Singapore is a compact society and its leaders had to set the exam­
ple in honesty and upright conduct. We considered it vital that the people 
feel confident the government would not cheat or harm them. Then, how­
ever unpopular government policies might be, the people accepted that 
they were not the result of immorality, nepotism, or corruption. 
Xu asked how a government should deal with foreign influences out 
to change a country's internal system. The problem, I said, was not for­
eigners directly interfering with our internal policies, but indirectly and 
insidiously, through their media and through personal contact, influenc­
ing and changing our people's attitudes and behavior. This would become 
increasingly difficult to control because satellite broadcasting technology 
would improve. We could only mitigate the harm to our social fabric by 
inculcating and strengthening the traditional values of our people. The 
family, I believed, had the greatest influence on a child's values in the first 
12 to 15 years of life. Sound values, if rooted early in life, could later resist 
contrary influences and pressures. Roman Catholic priests, if entrusted 
with a child for the first 12 years of its life, could usually ensure the child 
would remain Catholic for life. 
When the delegation returned to China, their report was circulated as 
"Reference News" and read by party members. In a paperback published 
to give an account of Singapore, Xu quoted what he considered my 
approach: "It requires prolonged efforts to administer a country well, and 
to change the backward habits of the people; a certain amount of adminis­
trative pressure is necessary at the beginning, but what is most important 
is education. " Li Ruihuan, the politburo member in charge of ideology, 
told me when I visited Beijing a year later that he had initiated the study 
mission. He had visited Singapore when he was mayor of Tianjin, and 
considered it worth a study. 
Another area they were interested in was our legal system. Qiao Shi, 
chairman of the National People's Congress standing committee and 
third-ranking leader of China, was also responsible for settling the neces­
sary legislation to establish the rule of law. He visited Singapore in July 
1993 to study our laws. The Chinese communist leaders, he said, had 
China: To Be Rich Is Glorious 649 
abolished all existing laws when they promulgated the People's Republic 
of China on 1 October 1949. Thereafter , they had governed by edicts. 
Party policies became the law. Only after Deng Xiaoping's open-door pol­
icy did they recognize the need for laws to govern commercial relations. 
Qiao Shi said no one would cooperate with China if it was seen as unstable 
and fractured. China needed the rule of law to maintain long-term stabil­
ity. I said China should be able to get a system of laws established in 20 to 
30 years, but it would take longer for people as a whole to accept the rule 
of law and act in accordance with it. He replied that not everyone had to 
understand it. As long as the top people practiced it, the rule of law 
would work. He came across as a serious man who had thought through 
his problems. 
China under Deng was more open and willing to learn from the world 
than it had been for centuries. Deng was courageous and strong enough in 
the party and the nation to admit openly that China had lost many years 
in pursuit of a revolutionary utopia. It was a refreshing time of open 
minds and enthusiastic progress, a radical change from the years of wild 
slogans and disastrous campaigns. Deng initiated the fundamental 
changes that laid the foundations for China to catch up with the rest of 
the world. 
In September 1992, together with Deputy Prime Minister Ong Teng 
Cheong, I visited Suzhou, China's Venice. It was in a dilapidated condi­
tion, with its canals filthy and polluted. But the idea struck us that we 
could redevelop Suzhou, make it into a beautiful city, and build a new 
industrial and commercial section next to it. It had beautiful Chinese gar­
dens built around villas so that every window and every veranda looked 
out on to rock gardens, water, and plants. Traces of its old grandeur could 
still be seen in some of the mansions that had been restored. 
Suzhou's mayor, Zhang Xinsheng, drew me aside after lunch one day 
to say, "Singapore has US$50 billion in reserves." "Who told you that?" I 
asked. He had read it in World Bank reports. He added, "Why don't you 
invest 10 percent of it in Suzhou? Get us industrialised like Singapore? I 
will guarantee you special treatment so that your investments will suc­
ceed." I said, "Able and energetic mayors soon get promoted; then what?" 
650 From Third World to First 
He paused and replied, "Well, you may have trouble with my successor, 
but after a while he will have no choice but to go along the route that I 
would have laid down. People in Suzhou want what they have seen of 
Singapore on television and in the newspapers-jobs, housing and a gar­
den city." I replied, "You have no power to give us a fresh site on which 
we can build a miniature Singapore. You need the central government's 
authority to do that." 
I gave no more thought to this. That December , he turned up at my 
office to say that he had approached Deng Xiaoping's office with his 
proposition. There was a good chance it would go through. Could I put 
up the proposal in a plan? He was close to Deng Xiaoping' s son, Deng 
Pufang. So Ong Teng Cheong did some artist's impressions of what old 
Suzhou could be like after restoration, with a modern industrial township 
next to it. A few months later, when Deng Pufang visited Singapore, I 
showed him sketch plans of a restored city together with an adjoining 
new industrial township. He was enthusiastic. His input through his 
father's office gave this project a push. When Prime Minister Goh visited 
Beijing in April, he discussed the proposal with Premier Li Peng and 
Jiang Zemin. 
In May 1993, I met Vice Premier Zhu Rongji in Shanghai. I had ear­
lier written to him on the Suzhou project. I explained my proposal for 
cooperation: a government-to-government technical assistance agreement 
to transfer our knowledge and experience (what we called "software ") in 
attracting investments and building industrial estates, complete with 
housing and commercial centers, to an unbuilt site of about 100 sq. km in 
Suzhou. This would be backed by a business consortium of Singapore and 
foreign companies in a joint venture with Suzhou authorities . The project 
would take more than 20 years to complete, and there would be difficul­
ties adapting our methods to the different conditions of China. 
At first Zhu thought my proposal was another money-making idea on 
behalf of our investors. I explained that my proposal was in response to 
many delegations that had come from China to study us in a piecemeal 
manner but would never understand how our system worked. With 
Singapore and Chinese managers working together side by side, we could 
transfer our methods, systems, and know-how . Zhu agreed it was worth 
trying. He pointed out that Suzhou had access to the Yangtze River and 
China: To Be Rich Is Glorious 651 
was near Shanghai (90 kilometers, or about 56 miles, to the west), China's 
largest international center. 
Four days later, I met newly promoted Vice Premier Li Lanqing in 
Beijing. He was from Jiangsu province, born in a town not far from 
Suzhou. He fully supported the project because Suzhou had high-quality 
people and could absorb and adapt Singapore's experience. Li said 
Singapore-China cooperation had the advantages of a common culture, 
tradition, and language . A pragmatist, he acknowledged that the project 
must be economically viable and yield a reasonable return. When he was 
vice mayor of Tianjin, his basic principle for cooperation had been "equal­
ity and mutual benefit." 
Beijing sent two delegations in October 1993 to study Singapore's 
system--one from the state council, the other from Jiangsu province. 
Only after they were satisfied that parts of our system were suitable for 
China did they agree to this "software transfer." 
In February 1994, I signed the Suzhou Agreement with Vice Premier 
Li Lanqing in Beijing, witnessed by Premier Li Peng and Prime Minister 
Goh. I met Jiang Zemin to confirm that the work in Suzhou would start 
soon but would take more than 10 years to reach a significant level of 
development. Jurong Industrial Township in Singapore, only 60 sq. km, 
had taken us 30 years. 
The project, Suzhou Industrial Park (SIP), took off with great enthu­
siasm on both sides, but we soon ran into difficulties. There was a diver­
gence of objectives between the center (Beijing) and the locals (Suzhou). 
The top leaders in Beijing knew that the essence of the project was to 
transfer our knowledge of how to plan, build, and administer a compre­
hensive industrial, commercial, and residential park that could attract 
high-quality foreign investors. The officials in Suzhou moved away from 
this core objective and were sidetracked by their parochial interests. We 
wanted to show them how to do things the Singapore way, with our 
emphasis on financial discipline, long-term master planning, and contin­
uing service to investors--our software. They wanted the "hardware"­
the buildings, roads, and infrastructure that we could build and the 
high-value investments we could attract using our worldwide connections 
and reputation. They were not focused on learning how to create a 
probusiness climate; nor did they select their most promising officials to 
652 From Third World to First 
be trained to take over from us. "Hardware" brought direct and immedi­
ate benefits to Suzhou and credit to its officials; Beijing wanted "soft­
ware" so as to spread its benefits to other cities through adopting Singa­
pore's probusiness practices. 
Instead of giving SIP their full attention and cooperation as was 
promised, they used their association with Singapore to promote their 
own industrial estate, Suzhou New District (SND), undercutting SIP in 
land and infrastructure costs, which they controlled. This made SIP less 
attractive than SND. Fortunately, many of the large MNCs valued our 
interface and chose SIP in spite of its higher land costs. Hence, despite 
these difficulties, SIP made significant progress and within three years 
had attracted over 100 projects with a total investment commitment of 
almost US$3 billion. It ranked top in China in terms of the average value 
of each investment project. These projects would create over 20,000 jobs, 
3 5 percent of which would be for the tertiary-educated. The chairman of 
the Office of the Special Economic Zone commented that "in merely three 
years from inception, SIP's speed of development and the overall standard 
are first-class in China." 
This progress was made in the face of increasing difficulties. The 
rivalry between SND and SIP confused potential investors and diverted the 
attention of the Suzhou officials from the objective of software transfer. 
Things came to a head in mid-1997 when the vice mayor of Suzhou, who 
ran SND, told a meeting of German investors in Hamburg that President 
Jiang did not support SIP, that they were welcome to SND and did not 
need Singapore. This made our position untenable. We were wasting too 
much time, energy, and resources fighting with the local authorities . 
I raised the problem with President Jiang in December 1997. He 
assured me that SIP remained his top priority and that the problems at the 
local level would be resolved. But notwithstanding this assurance from the 
very top in Beijing, Suzhou did not stop promoting SND in competition 
against SIP. We had reasons to believe they had borrowed so heavily that to 
stop promoting SND would cause severe financial difficulties. After much 
discussion we agreed in June 1999 that there would be a change in respon­
sibilities in the existing joint venture between the Singapore consortium 
and the Suzhou authorities. The Singapore consortium would remain the 
majority partner in control of the project and complete the first 8 sq. km 
China: To Be Rich Is Glorious 653 
by the end of the year 2000; the Suzhou authorities would then take over 
majority partnership, control the project and complete the rest of the 70 
sq. km using the first 8 sq. km as a reference model. We would remain for 
at least a further three years until 2003 as minority partners and help guide 
a Chinese management team in servicing investors in SIP. 
It was a chastening experience. Both sides had believed that because 
of apparent language and cultural similarities there would be fewer prob­
lems in dealing with each other--each side expected the other to behave 
like itself. Unfortunately, while language was no problem, our business 
cultures were totally different. Singaporeans take for granted the sanctity 
of contracts. When we sign an agreement, it is a full and final undertak­
ing. Any disagreement as to the meaning of the written document is 
interpreted by the courts or an arbitrator. We took great care that the doc­
uments we prepared were both in English and Chinese, with both ver­
sions authoritative. For the Suzhou authorities, a signed agreement is an 
expression of serious and sincere intent, but one that is not necessarily 
comprehensive and can be altered or reinterpreted with changing circum­
stances. We depended on laws and systems. They were guided by official 
directives; often these were not published and their interpretation varied 
with the official in charge. 
For example, power supply. Although the Suzhou government had in 
a written agreement promised to provide a certain quantity of electricity, 
it failed to get the relevant authority to deliver on its promise. To resolve 
this, we got the Suzhou government's permission to build a diesel power 
plant. After the plant was built, we were told that diesel plants were dis­
couraged by the power authority and were prohibited from operating it. 
The municipal officials explained that they had no control over the power 
authority. When they agreed to let us install the diesel power plant, they 
knew the power authority had overriding control on energy but did not 
tell us we needed the latter's concurrence. It took months of negotiation 
and only when the problem threatened to shut down the park was it 
resolved. The five years in Suzhou educated us on the intricacies of their 
multilayered administration and flexible business culture. We acquired a 
more intimate understa nding of their system and learned how to work 
around its blocks and obstacles to get them finally to wrap up our project 
as a partial success, not a total failure. 
654 From Third World to First 
China has an immensely complex government. After two centuries of 
decline that began with the Qing dynasty, China's leaders face the formi­
dable task of installing modern management systems and changing the 
mindsets and habits of officials steeped in the traditions of the imperial 
mandarinate. 
China is still a poor country with many backward provinces. Their domes­
tic problems require sustained economic growth to resolve. As China's 
development nears the point when it has enough weight to elbow its way 
into the region, it will make a fateful decision-whether to be a hegemon , 
using its weight to create its sphere of influence in the region for its eco­
nomic and security needs, or to continue as a good international citizen 
because it can achieve better growth by observing international rules. 
China has repeatedly stated that it will never become a hegemon. It is 
in everyone's interest that before that moment of choice arrives, China be 
given every incentive to choose international cooperation , which will 
absorb its energies constructively for another 50 to 100 years. This means 
China must have the economic opportunities to do this peacefully , with­
out having to push its way to get resources like oil, or to have access to 
markets for its goods and services. There are fair and equitable rules in 
multilateral organizations like the WTO for a free exchange of goods and 
services so that each country can stay within its borders and improve its 
people's well-being through trade, investments, and other exchanges. 
This was the way the Germans and the Japanese were able to rebuild after 
World War II. Their territories shrank even as they had to accept their 
nationals expelled from territories they had occupied and colonized. De­
spite smaller territorie s and reduced natural resources, both flourished as 
never before because they had access to markets through the IMF and 
GATT. If such a route is not open to China, the world must live with a 
pushy China. In that event, the United States will not be alone in being 
concerned about what China will do when it is able to contest the present 
world order settled by America and its partners in Europe. 
The Chinese Communist Party faces a profound challenge. Com­
munism has failed worldwide and the people of China know it. But the 
Chin a: To Be Rich Is Glorious 655 
CCP has not failed. It has liberated China, unified it, and enabled the peo­
ple to feed and clothe themselves. Despite the disasters of the Great Leap 
Forward (1958) and the Cultural Revolution (1966-197 6), the Chinese 
are proud that foreigners can no longer violate China's sovereignty with 
impunity as they did when they exercised extraterritorial rights in the 
foreign concessions. 
I had an interesting sample of the rapid change in China when in 
September 1994 I arrived at Zhengzhou Airport in the inland province of 
Henan. A line of their old Red Flag limousines was waiting. I knew 
Henan was not as prosperous as the coastal provinces but had not 
expected them to be still using the Red Flag limousines. To my surprise, 
they ushered me and the party secretary, Li Changchun , to a brand new 
Mercedes 600. I was intrigued to hear the familiar way in which he and 
the driver conversed with each other. Later, when I was alone with the 
driver, I asked how much he earned as a driver. He replied that he was 
really the owner of the car. Party Secretary Li had wanted to borrow it for 
my visit and he decided to drive it to meet me. Six years ago, he was a 
supervisor in a factory, but after Deng's exhortation to get rich, he had 
gone into business. He now had three factories employing some 5,000 
workers assembling electronic products. He owned three cars including 
this Mercedes 600. China was changing fast and irrevocably. 
The government and the CCP are also changing, but not as fast as the 
economy and society. To demonstrate popular support, the CCP has 
allowed elections at village and county levels. In provincial elections for 
high officials, Communist Party members who have not been nominated 
by the party can stand against the official candidates. The governor 
of Zhejiang province in 1994 was a candidate who had defeated the 
Communist Party nominee. The legitimacy of the CCP now rests upon 
the benefits that Deng Xiaoping's reforms initiated in 1978 have brought 
to the farmers and workers: more food, clothing, homes, and consumer 
goods-and more wealth than they ever had. But the people also know 
that the Chinese in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and Macau have done better 
than the mainland Chinese because they have free markets. As long as the 
CCP can produce results and improve the people's lives, its legitimacy 
will not be challenged. This could go on for another generation. The CCP 
656 From Third World to First 
policy is to absorb the best and the brightest into the party. Many have 
joined to avoid the disadvantages of not being a member, but the study of 
Marxist-Leninist-Maoist theories by party members is perfuncto ry. 
In the next 50 years, the Chinese will have to complete three transi­
tions: from a planned to a market economy, from a rural to an urban base, 
from a tightly controlled communist to an open civic society. Several fac­
tors can derail China from its present track of catching up with the indus­
trial nations. The first and most important is Taiwan. If Chinese leaders 
feel that Taiwan is going to go independent and could be lost, they will 
not be so detached and calculating and could act with unpredictable con­
sequences. The next factor is rapid urbanization. At present, 30 to 3 5 per­
cent of the 1.3 billion Chinese live in small towns and cities. By 2050, 
they will be 80 percent, well-informed and able through electronic means 
to mobilize for mass action. They will be able to do this with more ease 
than the Falungong, a cult that, through the Internet, organized some 
10,000 of its followers to gather peacefully in Beijing in April 1999 to 
squat around Zhongnanhai, the residence of the Communist Party lead­
ers. China's political structures must allow its citizens more participation 
and control over their lives or there will be pressures :hat could destabi­
lize society, especially during an economic downturn. 
A third factor would be the widening differences in incomes, growth 
rates, and quality of life between the wealthy coastal and riverine 
provinces and the disadvantaged inland provinces. However extensive the 
roads, railways, airfields, and other infrastructure the central government 
may build to bring industries, trade, investments, and tourism inland, 
they will still lag behind. This could increase peasant discontent, causing 
serious tensions and massive migrations. Furthermore, as more Han 
Chinese populate the border provinces of Tibet, Xinjiang, and Qinghai, 
there could be problems between them and the minority races. 
The fourth and most profound factor will be the different values and 
aspirations of the next generation. The people and government want to 
build a modern, strong, and united China, whatever that takes. Better 
education and wider global exposure will result in a people who are 
knowledgeable about the world, with frequent and multiple links with 
their counterparts in other societies. They will want Chinese society to be 
equal to other advanced countries in standard of living, quality of life, and 
China: To Be Rich Is Glorious 657 
individual freedoms. This desire is a powerful force that the leaders are 
harnessing to drive the nation forward. In particular, how Japan, Korea, 
and Taiwan, with cultures and traditions similar to the Chinese, are gov­
erned will have a great influence on the thinking of the Chinese intelli­
gentsia. 
Several problems can cause serious disruptions: a breakdown of the 
banking system, huge unemployment following reforms of state-owned 
enterprises without adequate social security nets, an aging population 
that will place a heavy burden on the one-child family generation having 
to support their elderly parents, and serious environmental pollution. 
However, the most pernicious problem is corruption. It has become 
embedded in their administrative culture and will be difficult to eradicate 
even after economic reforms. Many Communist Party members and gov­
ernment officials in the provinces, cities, and counties are not above cor­
ruption. Worse, many officials who are expected to uphold and enforce 
the law-public security officers, procurators, and judges-are also cor­
rupt. The root cause of the problem was the destruction of normal moral 
standards during the Cultural Revolution. Deng's open-door policy in 
1978 enlarged the opportunities for corruption. 
The leaders want to establish a legal system with proper institutions. 
Because they know the institutions necessary for the rule of law in a civil 
society cannot exist in a moral vacuum, they are reemphasizing Confucianist 
teachings among the population. They have also launched the "three­
stresses" campaign in an attempt to clean up the party's rank and file: to talk 
about learning, to talk about politics, and to talk about honor and dignity. 
But so long as officials are paid unrealistically low wages, such exhortations 
will have little effect, regardless of the severity of the punishment meted out, 
not even death and long prison terms. 
Nevertheless, pragmatic, resolute, and capable leaders have steered 
China through these perils since 1978. They command authority and 
credibility. They have successors in place as competent and resourceful 
and even better-educated than themselves. If these future leaders remain 
pragmatic, they should be able to overcome these difficulties. 
In the two and a half decades since my first visit in 1976, I have seen 
China transformed. I find most astonishing not the physical structures, 
new buildings, expressways, and airports, but the different attitudes and 
658 From Third World to First 
habits of the people and their willingness to speak their minds. Books are 
written and published that would have been sedition in the 1970s or 
1980s. The free market and modern communications have brought more 
openness and transparen cy. They will make China as different again in 
another two decades. 
I place my hope for China's progress on their best and brightest who 
have studied or travelled extensively abroad in their impressionable years. 
More than one hundred thousand of them are now studying in the United 
States, Western Europe, and Japan. The present leaders in their late six­
ties and seventies are products of the anti-Japanese war and did their post­
graduate work in Russia. Their mindsets will not change much. Many of 
their children who have Ph.D.s from American universities have vastly 
different outlooks. Vice Premier Qian Qichen, formerly the foreign min­
ister, has a son, Qian Ning, who worked for the People's Daily and shortly 
after Tiananmen went to the United States to study journalism in Ann 
Arbor. He stayed in America for four years and on his return wrote a can­
did book that was published and sold in China. The observations of a 
man with such an impeccable background are significant, reflecting the 
thinking of a younger generation in their thirties: "I realised a simple 
truth, we Chinese, at least the younger generation, can have another way 
of life .... Chinese women are liberated once again-what they have lost 
are only the chains of tradition, but what they have gained is their free­
dom." I believe it is not only Chinese women who lose their fetters after a 
stay in America. These men and women in their twenties and thirties 
who studied in the West are the best-equipped intellectually to meet the 
needs of China's modernization. They have been exposed to new ideas and 
knowledge in societies vastly different from their own. In 20 to 30 years, 
their generation will change the shape of China. They probably already 
realize that even after China has been restored as a great industrial power, 
it will not be a Tang or a Han "Middle Kingdom, " the center of the uni­
verse, but one of several advanced nations. 
Americans would do well to keep their options open. The Chinese are 
a different people with a different culture and a different history. They 
will change at their own pace in their quest for technology and a modern 
economy, preserving their values and traditions, and maintaining conti­
nuity with their past. China-bashing by constantly denigrating them for 
Chin a: To Be Rich Is Glorio us 659 
their lack of democracy and human rights will only antagonize a whole 
generation of Chinese and make them anti-America n and xenophobic. 
This is not far-fetched. When the tragic bombing of the Belgrade Chinese 
embassy took place in May 1999, I thought at first that the demonstra­
tions, with slogans reminiscent of the Cultural Revolution, were orches­
trated. But our mission in Beijing reported that the Chinese were gen­
uinely outraged and angered by what they saw as a bullying America 
out to put China down. To foster such a reaction will not contribute to 
peace and stability. The Americans will have to learn that some reforms 
require time to make them possible. And such changes will be made by 
the Chinese for Chinese purposes, not in order to comply with American 
norms, under American economic or moral sanctions. 
Even before the bombing, bilateral relations had already been 
strained when President Clinton did not accept major concessions made 
by Premier Zhu Rongji in April in Washington to join the WTO. When 
I met him in Beijing in September, Zhu dwelt at length on this subject. 
He would not back away from the offers he had made, but required seri­
ous concessions in return. Four days later, while in Shanghai for a meet­
ing of the Fortune Global Forum, Henry Kissinger and I urged Robert 
Rubin, the treasury secretary who had just resigned in July after an illus­
trious six-year term, to speak to President Clinton. And I made the same 
points a few days later to the U.S. secretary for defense, William Cohen, 
when he visited Singapore. Cohen, who needed no persuasion on the mer­
its of bringing China into the WTO, brought it up with his president. 
After five days of strenuous bargaining in Beijing, China and the 
United States reached agreement on 15 November 1999. It was a relaxed 
Premier Zhu who visited Singapore a fortnight later. He attributed the 
success of the negotiations to the intervention of President Jiang. Joining 
WTO was not without its dangers, he said to me, but if China's leaders 
did not believe they could overcome the problems, Jiang would not have 
agreed to it. Zhu's responsibility was to implement Jiang's decision. The 
painful measures necessary will be less difficult to execute because it was 
the president who made the decision to join. 
For both China and the United States, strategic considerations must 
have been as important as economic benefits in reaching this agreement. 
China's WTO membership will help it restructure its economy to gain in 
660 From Third World to First 
comp etitiveness and long-term growth , but it will have to become a rule­
abiding member of the internatio nal communi ty. 
Over the last 40 years , I have seen how Koreans , Taiwane se, and Japanese 
officia ls and business executives have changed . From a reserved , inward ­
looki ng, and nationa listic elite, they are now self-confident and at ease 
with American and Western ideas. Many of them have been educated in 
the Unit ed States and are not ill-disposed toward its people. This is not to 
say that Chinese on the mainland, conscious of their potential big-power 
status , will evolve just like the Taiwanese . America has a choice, to have 
them neutr al or friendly instead of becomin g hostile. When dealing with 
an old civili zation, it is wise not to expect swift changes . The biggest 
problem between America and Chin a will be Taiwan . 
It is an imponder able leftover from the unfinished Chinese civil war. 
With Taiwan under Chen Shui-bian, a new president whose party stands 
for independe nce, the danger of miscalculation by the three parties directly 
involved-the Mainland, Taiwan , and the U.S.- has increased . Any mis­
step could upset growth and developme nt in China and East Asia. This 
problem can be contai ned if the status quo is not changed, and eventual 
reunification is an aspira tion for both sides. 
Meanw hile, through the WTO, the Chinese economy can become 
integrated into the rest of the world . With broad and deepeni ng people­
to-people conta cts, stereotyped perce ptions of each other will be replaced 
by more realistic apprai sals. When the Chinese people's livelih ood is inter­
dependent with that of the world through trade, investment s, tourism, 
and the exchange of technology and knowledg e, there will be a better 
basis for a stable world . 
China has the potential to realize its goal of becom ing a modern econ­
omy by 2050. It can be engaged as an equal and responsible partner in 
trade and finance, and become one of the major players in the world . If it 
is not deflected from its present concentr ation on education and economic 
developme nt, Chin a could well be the second largest, if not the largest, 
trading nation in the world , with greater weight and voice in interna­
tional affairs. This is one vision of China in 50 years-m odern, confid ent, 
and respon sible. 
PART Ill 
Winding Up 
41. Passing the Baton 
When I reflected on the predicament of Suharto in 1998 when he was 
forced to resign and hand power over to a vice president he considered 
inadequate to succeed him, I was glad that I had resigned as prime min­
ister in November 1990. I was still in command of the political situation 
and of a humming economy. I was physically still vigorous. But had I not 
stood down, I might have found myself trapped in the financial crisis, 
with my faculties less acute and my energy levels down. Instead, for the 
past nine years I helped to ease the way for my successor, Goh Chok Tong, 
and his team of younger ministers to take full charge of the Singapore 
government . Prime Minister Goh retained me in his cabinet as senior 
minister. Without the pressure of daily decision making, I was able to 
reflect on the bigger and longer-term issues and contribute toward more 
rounded solutions. 
My experience of developments in Asia has led me to conclude that 
we need good people to have good government. However good the system 
of government, bad leaders will bring harm to their people. On the other 
hand, I have seen several societies well-governed in spite of poor systems 
of government, because good, strong leaders were in charge. I have also 
seen so many of the over 80 constitutions drafted by Britain and France 
for their former colonies come to grief, and not because of flaws in the 
constitutions. It was simply that the preconditions for a democratic sys­
tem of government did not exist. None of these countries had a civic soci­
ety with an educated electorate. Nor did their people have the cultural 
664 From Third World to First 
tradition of acceptance of the authority of a person because of that person's 
office. These traditions take generations to inculcate in a people. In a new 
country where loyalties are to tribal leaders, they must be honest and not 
self-serving or the country is likely to fail whatever the constitutional 
safeguards. And because the leaders who inherited these constitutions 
were not strong enough, their countries went down in riots, coups, and 
revolution . 
The single decisive factor that made for Singapore's development was 
the ability of its ministers and the high quality of the civil servants who 
supported them. Whenever I had a lesser minister in charge, I invariably 
had to push and prod him, and later to review problems and clear road­
blocks for him. The end result was never what could have been achieved. 
When I had the right man in charge, a burden was off my shoulders. I 
needed only to make clear the objectives to be achieved, the time frame 
within which he must try to do it, and he would find a way to get it done. 
It was Singapore's good fortune that we had, for a small, developing 
country, a fair share of talent, because our own had been reinforced by the 
talented men and women who came here for their education, and stayed 
on for employment or business opportunities. Because of our relentless 
and unceasing search for talent both at home and abroad to make up for 
the small families of the well-educated, Singapore has been able to keep 
up its performance. Our greatest task was to find the people to replace my 
aging ministers and myself. 
My colleagues and I had started to search for younger men as possible 
successors in the 1960s. We could not find them among the political 
activists who joined the PAP, so we scouted for able, dynamic, depend­
able, and hard-driving people wherever they were to be found. In the 
1968 general election, we fielded several Ph.D.s, bright minds, teachers 
at the universities, professionals including lawyers, doctors, and even top 
administrators as candidates . In by-elections in 1970 and 1972, we 
fielded several more. We soon discovered that they needed to have other 
qualities besides a disciplined mind able to marshal facts and figures, 
write a thesis for a Ph.D., or be a professional. Leadership is more than 
just ability. It is a combination of courage, determination, commitment, 
character, and ability that makes people willing to follow a leader. We 
needed people who were activists with good judgment and interpersonal 
Passing the Bacon 665 
skills. The search became more urgent at each subsequent election 
because I could see that my colleagues were visibly slowing down. 
One day in 197 4, Hon Sui Sen, then our finance minister, told me 
that he hoped I would let him stand down at the next general election. He 
was feeling his age. I was astonished. He was only 60. How could I let 
him go? Who would do his job? Over lunch, just the two of us, this con­
versation had more impact on me than any other exchange I have ever 
had. He said investors had been confident because they were comfortable 
with the ministers in charge, especially with me. But they could see that 
he was getting on and were looking beyond and behind him to see who 
would replace him. They could not see a younger minister with the 
potential to be minister for finance. I had many more years to go, but he 
did not think he could carry on for much longer. He had met many CEOs 
of American corporations. They had to retire at 65. Several years before a 
CEO's retirement, he had to put before the board one or more candidates 
for them to choose one as his successor. I resolved that I must not be found 
wanting in this respect, and that I must place Singapore in competent 
hands before I retired. 
To do this I had to find and get into office a group of men to provide 
Singapore with effective and creative leadership. Had I left it to chance, 
depending on activists coming forward to join us, I would never have suc­
ceeded. We set out to recruit the best into government. The problem was 
to persuade them to enter politics, get themselves elected, and learn how 
to move and win people over to their side. It was a slow and difficult 
process with a high attrition rate. Successful, capable professionals and 
executives are not natural political leaders, able to argue, cajole, and 
demolish the arguments of opponents at mass rallies, on television, and in 
Parliament. 
To see how wide the net must be cast for talent, I had only to remem­
ber that the best ministers in my early cabinets were not born in 
Singapore. Three-quarters of them had come from outside Singapore. The 
net that brought in my generation of leaders was thrown in a big sea that 
stretched from South China across Malaysia, to South India and Ceylon. 
Now we were fishing in a small pond and getting fewer big fish. 
For years my colleagues and I had assumed that in the ordinary polit­
ical process, activists from universities, trade unions, and party branches 
666 From Third World to First 
would throw up the people who could carry on our work. By 1968, we 
recognized this was not going to happen. The original team had been 
thrown up by the traumatic events of World War 11,Japanese occupation, 
and the communist insurgency . The weak, the timid, and the irresolute 
were eliminated by natural process. By surviving, they proved they could 
stay on top of the opposition and govern. Their convictions pitted them 
against the British, and later the communists and the Malayan Malay 
Ultras. During repeated crises, we had forged deep and abiding bonds 
between ourselves and the people. These bonds endured. Our final task 
was to find worthy successors. Mao tried to solve this problem of suitable 
successors by arranging a Cultural Revolution as a substitute for the Long 
March. It was not possible for us to simulate a Japanese invasion and 
occupation, and the subsequent struggle for independence. Our solution 
was to look for men with the right character, ability, and motivation, and 
hope that when they encountered the inevitable crises, they would emerge 
tested as leaders. 
The general election of 1968 was a political landmark with 18 new 
candidates out of 58. We won all the seats and improved the quality of 
our MPs and ministers. Over 40 percent were university-educated either 
in English or Chinese, while 5 5 percent had secondary or higher sec­
ondary education. Those without much education were trade unionists 
who had left school early because their families were too poor. The loyal­
ists who had been with us from the difficult early days had to give way to 
fresh talent when I made promotions to office. At a meeting of MPs in 
April, soon after the election, I compared the party to an army where 
there had to be constant recruitment. Most would join as privates, some 
as officers. Some would not be more than sergeants. It did not follow that 
all who joined as officers would become generals. Those who proved their 
worth, whether or not they had university degrees, would be promoted. I 
had to prepare the ground for a thorough change of office holders. I pro­
tected the interests of the faithful by a Parliamentary Pensions Act. All 
those who had served for not less than nine years as MPs, parliamentary 
secretaries, and ministers would be entitled to pensions. 
Of all my ministers, Hon Sui Sen was the best at talent scouting. It 
was he who chose Goh Chok Tong to run Neptune Orient Lines, our 
national shipping line, when it was making a loss; Goh turned it around 
Passin g the Bacon 667 
in a few years. Sui Sen also brought in Dr. Tony Tan, who later became our 
deputy prime minister. He was a physics lecturer at the University of 
Singapore, then was the general manager of Singapore's largest bank, 
Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation. Sui Sen talent-spotted S. Dhana­
balan, who had worked with him in the EDB and was in the Develop­
ment Bank of Singapore; he was later to be a minister in charge of several 
important portfolios. 
I systematically scanned the top echelons of all sectors in Singapore­
the professions, commerce, manufacturing, and trade unions-to look for 
men and women in their thirties and forties whom we could persuade to 
stand as our candidates. Ability can be assessed fairly accurately by a per­
son's academic record and achievement in work. Character is not so easily 
measured. After some successes but too many failures, I concluded that it 
was more important, though more difficult, to assess a person's character. 
In 1970, when the American spaceship Apollo 13 malfunctioned 
nearly 300,000 miles out in space, I watched the unfolding drama, fasci­
nated. One false move by any one of the three men on board would have 
left them drifting into outer space, never to return. They remained calm 
and collected throughout the ordeal, entrusting their survival to the judg­
ment of the people at ground control whose instructions they followed 
meticulous ly. I saw this as proof that NASA's psychological and other 
tests conducted on the ground, simulating the weightless and isolated 
conditions in spaceships, had successfull y eliminated those who were prone 
to panic in a crisis. I decided to have one psychologist and one psychiatrist 
test our candidates. 
They put prospective PAP election candidates who had the potential 
to be ministers through psychological tests designed to define their char­
acter profile, intelligence, personal backgrounds, and values. These tests 
were not conclusive but they helped to eliminate the obviously unsuitable 
and were an advance on gut reactions during a two-hour interview . From 
time to time I would disagree with the conclusions of the psychologists, 
especially where I felt the candidate had been smarter than the inter­
viewer and been able to "fake good" without appearing to do so. 
Professor H.J. Eysenck, a psychologist from London University who 
visited Singapore in 1987, reinforced my view that testing for IQ and per­
sonality and character traits was useful. He cited an American oil MNC 
668 From Third World to First 
that employed 40 psychologists for the recruitment and promotion of 
40,000 employees. We did not have enough trained psychologists to 
assess the candidates for important appointments. After a discussion with 
him, I got the NUS to train more behavioral psychologists to help in 
selecting people with the right attributes for various jobs. 
I also checked with corporate leaders of MNCs how they recruited 
and promoted their senior people, and decided one of the best systems was 
that developed by Shell, the Anglo-Dutch oil company. They concen­
trated on what they termed a person's "currently estimated potential." 
This was determined by three qualities-a person's power of analysis, 
imagination, and sense of reality. Together they made up an overarching 
attribute Shell called "helicopter quality," the ability to see facts or prob­
lems in a larger context and to identify and zoom in on critical details. A 
panel of assessors, at least two of whom must know the person being 
assessed, could accurately rank executives of broadly similar abilities for 
helicopter quality. After trying out the system and finding it practical 
and reliable, I adopted it for our public service in 1983, replacing the 
British system we had inherited. 
Some people are naturally better than others in seeing into or through 
a person, and make excellent interviewers and assessors. One such out­
standing person was Tan Teck Chwee, the chairman of our public service 
commission from 1975 to 1988. No candidate for recruitment or officer 
for promotion succeeded in deceiving him. It had nothing to do with 
Tan's undoubtedl y high IQ. It had much to do with a different part of his 
mind that enabled him to read a person's character from facial expressions, 
tone of voice, and body language. Another with this gift is Lim Kim San, 
a former senior cabinet minister. I put him on every panel for the selection 
of PAP candidates for election. His assessments were more visceral than 
cerebral and most times correct. His exact opposite, a cerebral person 
lacking this gift, was Goh Keng Swee. Often he would pick an officer or 
an aide and rave about his excellent qualities based on the person's paper­
work. Six to 12 months later, he would be looking for a replacement. He 
simply could not see through a person. Psychologists call this ability 
social or emotional intelligence. 
My attempt to inject new blood into the leadership was not without 
stress. Several old guard ministers were concerned about the pace at which 
Passing the Baton 669 
they were being replaced. Toh Chin Chye said that I should stop talking 
about the old guard getting old because they were not getting old that 
fast, that I was demoralizing them. I disagreed. We were all slowing 
down and visibly aging, including me and Toh himself. In cabinet, he 
would put an electric heater under the cabinet table to blow warm air 
over his feet. I could see myself in the mirror. I did not feel the same inex­
haustible enthusiasm and zest to see and find out things for myself. More 
and more I relied on reports, photographs, and videos. 
Toh and several of the old guard wanted our successors to come up 
the same way we had done, as activists, not by head-hunting and direct 
recruitment. Keng Swee, Rajaratnam, Kim San, and Sui Sen did not 
believe there was much chance of reproducing ourselves in that way. 
After the December 1980 election, I decided to send a clear signal to all 
the old guard that the course of self-renewal was irreversible, although 
the pace would depend on how successful the new MPs proved to be. I 
left Toh out of the new cabinet. I was concerned that several of the old­
timers might rally around him to slow down the pace of self-renewal . I 
sensed that one old guard minister, Ong Pang Boon, shared Toh's unease, 
as did a number of the older ministers of state and parliamentary secre­
taries including Lee Khoon Choy, Fong Sip Chee, Chan Chee Seng, and 
Chor Yock Eng. I had to drop Toh to preempt any split in the leadership. 
It was painful after so many years working together. The support of the 
old guard had made possible what we had achieved, but it was our joint 
responsibility to ensure that Singapore continued to be governed by able, 
honest, and dedicated men. The original team had peaked and was run­
ning out of steam. 
The new MPs, bright young men who had won scholarships to 
renowned universities overseas and in Singapore, were taking over key 
jobs within three to four years of joining the PAP. The veterans felt that 
they should not have such an easy path to office, but should learn and 
wait. I did not think young and talented men would sit and wait; either 
they were going to make it or they would want to move on. 
Toh was bitter. I offered to make him our high commissioner in 
London, but he did not want to leave Singapore because of his young 
daughter's education. He found another appointment for himself. He 
stayed on in Parliament for another two terms, sniping at me and the 
670 From Third World to First 
PAP, never enough to be accused of disloyalty, but enough to be a mild 
embarrassment. I did not want to put him down publicly. 
After I dropped Toh from the cabinet, I told Pang Boon that I would 
appoint him for another term, but I could not allow any obstruction to 
self-renewal. He understood and we avoided a clash. When he retired in 
December 1984, I wrote to him expressing my appreciation for his work 
from 1959 to 1984, adding, 
I also thank you for helping in the selection of candidates for self­
renewal. You had certain reservations. You pointed out that only 
time and crises can reveal latent defects in a person. I agree with 
you. You also had misgivings, as had Chin Chye, over the speed of 
self-renewal and the effect it was haviug on the morale of old 
guard MPs. I must take the responsibility for both the method 
and the pace of self-renewal, though it is reassuring to me that 
Goh Keng Swee and Rajaratnam supported me. A younger team 
of ministers and MPs have now become the majority both in cab­
inet and in Parliament. There is no turning back. I am confident 
that the younger leaders will be equal to the task, but if not, the 
responsibility will be mine, shared with Keng Swee and 
Rajaratnam. 
The one retirement I felt most keenly was Keng Swee's. In mid-1984, 
he told me that he had decided, for personal reasons, to step down at the 
end of the term and would not contest the next election. He had done 
enough and it was time to go. For several years after he left, he was 
invaluable as deputy chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore. 
He also set up the Government of Singapore Investment Corporation as a 
separate organization to handle our national savings and reserves. 
The old guard took some time to accept the new blood, and some 
were never reconciled to seeing them promoted over their heads. I under­
stood their feelings. Fong Sip Chee had been a stalwart PAP member from 
the 1950s when the PAP was an endangered party. He became an MP in 
1963 and was a minister of state from 1981 to 1985. He never understood 
why he was not more deserving of promotion and believed, wrongly, that 
it was because he had not been to university. Others like Ch'ng Jit Koon, 
Passin g the Bacon 671 
a minister of state, and Ho Kah Leong, a parliamentary secretary, both 
Nanyang graduates, supported and worked with the new ministers. It was 
an emotionally difficult but necessary changeover. I had to do it, whatever 
my own feelings. 
After the 1980 party conference, I promoted six young ministers of 
state to the cabinet. This encouraged other young talent to join and be 
tested as ministers of state. Besides high helicopter quality, they needed 
to have political sense and the temperament to establish rapport with 
grassroots leaders. Those with these extra qualities I took into cabinet. 
For every person who made it we would have interviewed more than 
10. The attrition rate was high because, despite all the psychological 
tests, we could never accurately assess character, temperament, and moti­
vation. To succeed, the man (or woman) and his spouse and family had to 
be prepared for loss of privacy and time. Nursing a constituency and 
attending official functions, plus a lower income than they could earn 
outside, made political office unattractive. Most of all, the person must 
have that extra quality, the capacity to work with people and persuade 
them to support his policies. 
I decided 1988 would be the last election I would lead as prime min­
ister. After I won, I asked the younger ministers to decide among them­
selves whom they would support as prime minister. I had helped to select 
them as MPs and appointed them as ministers. I wanted my successor to 
have the support of his peers. I had seen how Deng Xiaoping had failed 
with his appointees, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang. I also remembered 
how Anthony Eden, chosen by Winston Churchill, failed. The younger 
ministers chose Goh Chok Tong. 
Chok Tong was not a natural politician. He was tall, gangling, and 
awkward, and spoke English with a heavy Hokkien accent. When he 
became an MP in 1976 he was self-conscious and without the gift of 
speech-making. But he had ability, dedication, and drive, and was inter­
ested in people. Soon after I brought him into the cabinet I advised him 
to take lessons to improve his public-speaking skills. We found an 
English woman to teach him and some of the other new ministers to 
speak in a more relaxed, natural way. From my own experience in learning 
Mandarin and Hokkien, I knew it was not easy to change childhood 
speech patterns. I described to Chok Tong my own experience, how for 
672 From Third World to First 
years I spent hours in between work practicing Mandarin and Hokkien 
with teachers to improve my fluency. My old teachers introduced 
Mandarin teachers to him. He applied himself with determination and 
became a much more effective communicator. 
In the 1990 cabinet, together with Chok Tong, were Ong Teng 
Cheong, S. Dhanabalan, Tony Tan, Yeo Ning Hong, Lee Yock Suan, S. 
Jayakumar, Richard Hu, Wong Kan Seng, Lee Hsien Loong, Yeo Cheow 
Tong, Ahmad Mattar, and George Yeo. I had brought together men of 
integrity and ability with strong commitment to society. After several 
years of experience working together with the old guard in cabinet, they 
were as prepared as could be. I resigned that November. 
I had been prime minister for 31 years. To have stayed on for another 
term would have proved nothing except that I was still fit and effective. 
On the other hand, if in the years that I had left, I was able to help my 
successor get a grip on his job and succeed, that would be my final contri­
bution to Singapore. I did not suffer any withdrawal syndrome. Chok 
Tong did not want to move into my old office in the lstana Annexe, 
which I had occupied for 20 years since I moved from City Hall, but chose 
to create a new office on the floor above mine. I continued to make a con­
tribution through discussions in cabinet and in bilateral meetings with 
the prime minister and other ministers. 
Chok Tang's style, the way he worked with his team, was different 
from mine. He carefully planned the various steps he needed to swing 
public opinion slowly toward the desired goal. It worked. In the January 
1997 election, the PAP increased its percentage of votes from 61 percent 
to 65 percent for the 36 constituencies contested. It won back two of the 
four seats lost in 1991. Prime Minister Goh and his ministers were in full 
command. 
A crisis tested Chok Tong and his team in mid-1998 when our cur­
rency went down in value, and stock and property prices fell by 40 per­
cent following the collapse of our neighbors' economies. Many MNCs 
retrenched workers in Singapore and transferred their operations to our 
lower-cost neighbors. The problem was similar to the recession in 1985 
when we had overpriced ourselves by allowing higher wages, fees, and 
taxes and other costs. The solution then was a raft of cost-cutting mea­
sures, 15 percent decrease in the employers' contribution to the workers' 
Passing the Bacon 673 
CPF and lower fees and taxes. Chok Tong's team worked out a similar 
package that reduced costs by cutting taxes and lowering employers' con­
tribution to the CPF from 20 percent to 10 percent. Retrenchments 
slowed down. By the middle of 1999, the economy had revived. Their 
steady and competent management of the crisis won them the confidence 
of international fund managers and investors. 
42. My Family 
The communists impressed me by the great importance they placed on 
the woman a prospective supporter was attached to. They knew a wife 
could make an enormous difference to a man's reliability and commit­
ment to the cause. They had objected to my political secretary, Jek Yeun 
Thong's steady girlfriend, whom they regarded as not politically suitable. 
He ignored this objection and without his knowledge they dropped him 
from their cell network. They were right; she was not supportive of their 
cause. 
I was fortunate. Choo never had any doubts or hesitation about my 
going on with the fight, whatever the consequences. She told me she had 
absolute confidence in my judgment. She was a great source of strength 
and comfort. She has a keen intuition when judging people. While I 
make up my mind more on analysis and reason, she decides more on "feel" 
and has an uncanny knack of sensing the real feelings and positions of a 
person behind the smiles and friendly words. She was often right about 
who not to trust, although she could not quite explain why-maybe it 
was the expression on a person's face, the way he smiled, the look in his 
eyes, or his body language. Whatever it was, I learned to take her reserva­
tions about people seriously. Early in 1962, when I was negotiating with 
the Tunku to join Malaysia, she expressed her reservations over whether 
we could work with the Tunku, Razak, and the other UMNO and MCA 
leaders. She said they were different in temperament, character, and social 
habits, that she could not see the PAP ministers getting along with them. 
676 From Third World to First 
I replied we simply had to work with them, because we needed to. We 
had to have a merger and a broader base to build a nation. Within three 
years, by 1965, she was proved right. We were incompatible and they 
asked us to leave Malaysia. 
Meeting the wives of foreign leaders, she would give me a good read­
ing of their husband's friendliness or otherwise from the way the wife 
acted or talked to her. I never took her views as the last word, but I did 
not dismiss them. 
She saved me much time and tedious work, correcting the drafts of 
speeches that I dictated and the transcripts of what I said in Parliament 
and in interviews. She is familiar with my vocabulary and can guess my 
dictated words that my stenographers cannot make out. I made a point, 
however, not to discuss the formulation of policies with her, and she was 
scrupulous in not reading notes or faxes that were sensitive. 
For my part, the knowledge that she had her profession as a lawyer 
and if necessary could look after herself and bring up the children on her 
own freed me from worries about their future. They were a source of 
joy and satisfaction. She brought chem up well-mannered and self­
disciplined, never throwing their weight around, although they had 
grown up as the prime minister's children. Our home at Oxley Road was 
only a seven-minute drive from her office at Malacca Street. She hardly 
ever attended business lunches with clients. Instead she would return 
home to have lunch with the children and keep in touch. When she was 
away at the office she had reliable, long-serving "black-and-white " 
Cantonese maids, so named for their black pants and white blouses, to 
mind chem. Choo used a cane when the children were particularly 
naughty or disobedient. I did not physically punish chem; a stern rebuke 
was effective enough. Having a violent father turned me against using 
physical force. 
We had decided in 1959, when I first took office as prime minister, 
not to live at Sri Temasek, my official residence in the Iscana domain. 
They were very young and we did not wane chem to grow up in such 
grand surroundings with butlers and orderlies to fuss over their needs. It 
would have given them an unrealistic view of the world and their place in 
it. Watching them grow up constantly reminded me of the need to build 
a safe and wholesome environment for our children to live in. 
My Family 677 
All three-Hsien Loong (born 1952), Wei Ling (1955), and Hsien 
Yang (195 7�were educated in Chinese schools, first Nanyang kinder­
garten, then Nanyang Primary School for six years. The boys went on to 
Catholic High School and then to National Junior College. Ling contin­
ued in Nanyang Girls' High School, then went to Raffles Institution. 
They were similar in their academic performance-good at science and 
mathematics, fair in Chinese, poor at drawing, singing, music, and hand­
work. 
We made it a point, and so did they, that they had to make it on their 
own. All three won the President's scholarship, awarded to the 5 to 10 best 
A level students of their year. The two boys were also awarded SAF schol­
arships. This required them to undergo military training during their uni­
versity summer vacations, and to serve in the Singapore Armed Forces for 
at least eight years upon graduation. Choo and I did not encourage them to 
do law; we left them to decide what they were good at and interested in 
doing. Loong enjoyed mathematics and wanted to do it at university but 
was quite sure he did not want it as his career. So, he studied mathematics 
at Trinity College, Cambridge, became a "Wrangler" (first-class honors in 
maths) in two instead of the usual three years, then took a postgraduate 
diploma in computer science with a star for distinction. He was trained in 
field artillery at Fort Sill, Oklahoma , later spent a year at the Command 
and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, then a year on pub­
lic administration at the Kennedy School of Government in Harvard. 
Yang liked engineering. Not intimidated by his brother's record, he 
also went to Trinity College, Cambridge, and took Firsts in both parts of 
the engineering Tripos. He went to Fort Knox for armor training, later to 
Camberley, England, for Staff and Command, and to Stanford University, 
California, for a year in business administration. 
Ling was fond of dogs and wanted to be a vet. Choo dissuaded her by cit­
ing what a vet friend did in Singapore: inspecting pigs at the slaughterhouse 
before and after slaughter to make sure they were fit for human consump­
tion. That settled her choice. When she won the President's scholarship, she 
chose to do medicine in the University of Singapore and graduated as the 
Honors student, the top student of her year. She specialized in pediatric neu­
rology and was attached for three years to Massachusetts General Hospital 
and later spent a year at Toronto's Children's Hospital. 
678 From Third World to First 
Loong was always interested in what was going on in the country and 
in government. As a schoolboy of 11, he accompanied me when I went on 
constituency visits to rally ground support in the months before we 
joined Malaysia. He was old enough at 12 to remember the panic and tur­
moil of the 1964 race riots, including a sudden curfew that caught him at 
Catholic High School in Queen's Street wondering how he was to get 
home. The family driver had the wit to drive my father's small Morris 
Minor to take him home in chaotic traffic. Loong had been studying 
Malay since he was 5, and after Singapore joined Malaysia, had started 
learning to read Jawi, Malay written in the Arabic script. For practice he 
read the Utusan Melayu, Umno's Jawi newspaper, which published wild 
communal accusations against the PAP and me. Politics was a part of his 
extracurricular education. 
From his student days in Cambridge, he knew he wanted a part in 
deciding what Singapore was to become and was willing to enter the 
political arena. After his Maths Tripos examinations, his tutor in Trinity 
College had urged him to reconsider returning to serve in the SAF, and 
pursue instead a career in mathematics in Cambridge, since he had done 
exceptionally well. The president of Oxford and Cambridge Society of 
Singapore, when presenting him with the prize as the best Singapore stu­
dent of 1974 class, referred to a letter from another tutor of Trinity 
College. He wrote that Loong had obtained "50% more alpha marks than 
the next first class candidate" and that "in the recorded history of the 
Mathemat ical Tripos such a difference between the top man and the next 
has never been known before." 
When I met his tutor at his graduation, he told me that Loong had 
written to him a most rational, thorough, and thoughtful letter explain­
ing why he would not go on with mathematics no matter how good he 
was at it. Later, I asked his tutor for a copy of this letter that Loong had 
sent him in August 1972: 
Now the reasons for not becoming a professional mathematician. 
It is absolutely necessary that I remain in Singapore, whatever I 
do, not only because in my special position if I "brain-drained" 
overseas the effect on Singapore would be disastrously demoralis-
My Family 
ing, but also because Singapore is where I belong and where I 
want to be .... Further, a mathematician really has little say in 
what goes on in the world around him, in the way things are 
going on in the country. This does not matter at all in a large 
developed country like Britain, but in Singapore it would matter 
very much to me. It does not mean that I have to go into politics, 
but an important member of the civil service or the armed forces 
is in a position to do a great deal of good or harm .... I would 
prefer to be doing things and perhaps be cursed by other people 
than have to curse at someone else and not be able to do any 
more. 679 
He was then only 20 but he knew his mind and where his commit­
ments were. 
Life is not without its tragedies. Loong married in 1978 Dr. Wong Ming 
Yang, a Malaysian he had met when she was in Girton College studying 
medicine at Cambridge. In 1982, she gave birth to their second child, a boy, 
Yipeng. He was an albino and visually handicapped. Three weeks later Ming 
Yang died of a heart attack. Loong's world collapsed. His mother-in-law 
looked after his two children, with Choo pitching in. They had the help of a 
maid whom Pamelia (my brother Suan's wife) had immediately sent over to 
meet this emergency. Later, we worried that Yipeng was slow in learning to 
speak and did not relate to people. When Ling returned from her training in 
pediatric neurology at the Massachusetts General Hospital, she diagnosed 
him as autistic. After some years in a preparatory school followed by a school 
for the visually handicapped, Yipeng's socialization skills improved and he 
was able to join a mainstream secondary school. Ling rediagnosed him as 
having Asperger's Syndrome (a mild form of autism) and he is intellectually 
normal. He has turned out to be good-natured and the best-behaved and 
most likeable of my grandchildren. 
While Loong was still unsettled after his bereavement, Goh Chok 
Tong, then the minister for defense and assistant secretary-general of the 
PAP, invited him to stand for Parliament in the December 1984 general 
election. At that time Loong was a colonel on the general staff and the 
joint staff in the SAF. Chok Tong, as his minister, had a high assessment 
680 From Third World to First 
of Loong's potential in politics. Loong was concerned chat, as a widower 
with two young children, he would find it difficult to manage the family 
as he would have to be absent much of the time on political work. He dis­
cussed it with Choo and me. I cold him chat if he missed the coming elec­
tion he would have co wait for four co five years before he would have 
another chance. With every passing year he would find it more difficult co 
change and adjust to political life, especially learning to work with people 
in the constituencies and the unions. Most of all, he had co feel deeply for 
people, be able to communicate his feeling for chem, and move them co 
go with him. At the age of 32, Loong left the SAF and contested the elec­
tion in December. He won one of the highest majorities of any candidate 
in the election. 
I appointed Loong a junior minister in the ministry of trade and 
industry. His minister immediately put him in charge of a private sector 
committee to review the economy just as we entered a severe recession in 
1985. The committee 's proposals chat the government cake strong seeps 
to reduce business coses and strengthen competitiveness were a major 
political test for Loong and the ocher ministers. In November 1990, when 
I resigned as prime minister, Loong was appointed deputy prime minister 
by Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. 
Many of my critics thought chis smacked of nepotism, chat he was 
unduly favored because he was my son. On the contrary, as I told the party 
conference in 1989, the year before I resigned, it would not be good for 
Singapore or for Loong to have him succeed me. He would be seen as hav­
ing inherited the office from me when he should deserve the position on 
his own merit. He was still young and it was better chat someone else suc­
ceed me as prime minister. Then were Loong co make the grade lacer, it 
would be clear that he made it on his own merit. 
For several years, Chok Tong had to endure the jeers of foreign critics 
chat he was a seat warmer for Loong. But after Chok Tong won his second 
general election in 1997 and consolidated his position as his own man, 
the jeering stopped. As Chok Tong's deputy, Loong has established his 
standing as a political leader in his own righc---de cermined, fast, and ver­
satile in ranging over the whole field of government. Almost every diffi­
cult or taxing problem in any ministry had his attention. Ministers, MPs, 
My Family 681 
and senior civil servants knew this. I could have stayed on a few years 
longer and allowed him to gather support to be the leader. I did not do so. 
When Choo and I were in Johannesburg in October 1992, Loong 
phoned from Singapore while I was addressing a conference. I immedi­
ately rang back, fearing bad news. It was, devastating. A biopsy of a polyp 
found in his colon had been diagnosed as cancer, a lymphoma. Subsequent 
news gave us some grounds for relief; the form Loong suffered from was 
intermediate grade lymphoma which usually responded to chemotherap y. 
Loong underwent a three-mont h course of intensive chemotherap y. It 
cleared up his cancer cells and brought him a remission. The specialists 
advised that if it did not recur within five years his remission could be 
considered a cure. We waited anxiously for the five years to elapse. 
October 1997 came and passed without mishap. Loong had gone through 
two major crises. 
In December 1985, Loong married Ho Ching whom he had known 
as an engineer in the ministry of defense. She had won the President's 
scholarship in 1972 and taken first-class honors in engineering at the 
University of Singapore. She is now a hands-on chief executive of a 
government- linked company, Singapore Technologies. It was a happy 
choice. They have two sons and Ho Ching embraced Loong's two other 
children as her own. 
Yang married a girl from Singapore, Lim Suet Fern, who was study­
ing law at Girton College, Cambridge, and also took a First. They have 
three sons. After 15 years in the SAF, Yang was seconded to Singapore 
Telecom. He had been asked by his permanent secretary to join the civil 
service as an administrative officer with the prospect of soon becoming a 
permanent secretary, and the potential to be head of the civil service. He 
preferred the challenge of the private sector, and opted to join SingTel. 
When he was promoted to CEO, my critics again alleged nepotism. It 
would have been a disaster for him and for the system of meritocracy that 
I had set up if he had been promoted because of me. The officers he 
served with and his peers knew better. So did the fund managers. SingTel 
shares did not weaken. After several years dealing with chairmen and 
CEOs of major international telecom companies, all talk of favoritism 
evaporated. 
682 From Third World to First 
When our children were still in school, years before I raised the 
unmarried graduate women issue in 1983, Choo and I had told them that 
when they marry they muse be happy to have their children as bright only 
as their spouses. They married their equals. 
Ling, a neurologist, is a deputy director (clinical services) of the 
National Neuroscience Institute at Tan Tock Seng Hospital. She is 
unmarried, like many ocher graduate women of her generation. She lives 
with us, as is normal in Asian families, and travels extensively to confer­
ences on neurology, pursuing her interest in epilepsy and learning disabil­
ities in children. 
The family has remained close. When they come for lunch on 
Sundays, the younger boys work each other up and create boisterous bed­
lam in the dining room. Mose people dote on their grandchildren , spoil­
ing them in the process. We are fond of ours, but feel that their parents 
are overindulgent. Perhaps we were too strict with their parents, but it 
has served chem well. 
My three brothers, Dennis, Freddy, and Suan Yew, a sister, Monica, 
and I have all benefited from a strong, resourceful, and determined 
mother who ensured that we were educated to the best of our abilities and 
her resources. Dennis followed me to read law at Fitzwilliam House in 
Cambridge. Lacer, together with Choo, we practiced law in partnership as 
Lee & Lee, and after a year Eddie Barker, an old friend at Raffles College 
and in Cambridge, joined us. Freddy became a stockbroker. Suan went to 
Fitzwilliam to study medicine and came back to build a successful prac­
tice. Monica married early. They rallied around to help in many ways 
when the family was in trouble, as when Loong lose Ming Yang in 1982, 
and again when he had cancer in 1992. 
My siblings and I are especially close to each other. I was not just the 
eldest brother buc also the one who helped our mother co make the major 
decisions. My father was carefree by nature and early in my teens my 
mother had co-opted me as the substitute head of the family. My brothers 
and sister still regard me as head of the family as much as the eldest 
brother. The extended family meets at least twice a year, on Chinese New 
Year's Eve for a reunion dinner and on New Year's Day at my home in 
Oxley Road. We keep in touch whenever there is anything important, 
My Family 683 
like the arrival of new grandchildren. Now in our sixties and seventies, we 
are reminded how much we share of our parents' genes as with each illness 
our doctors check to confirm that our siblings are not similarly afflicted. 
We are grateful that three of us have already exceeded the biblical three 
score and ten. 
43. Epilogue 
As a boy of six, I rode in a bullock-cart on wooden wheels bound in a 
metal strip, without springs or shock absorbers, enjoying a hilariously 
bumpy ride on a dirt track to my grandfather's rubber estate. Fifty years 
later, in 1977, I flew in a supersonic Concorde from London to New York 
in three hours. Technology has changed my world. 
I have had to sing four national anthems: Britain's God Save the Queen, 
Japan's Kimigayo, Malaysia's Negara Ku, and finally Singapore's Majulah 
Singapura; such were the political upheavals of the last 50 years. Foreign 
troops have come and gone-British, Australian, and Indian, then the 
Japanese, with their auxiliaries, the Taiwanese and Koreans. The British 
returned after the war and fought the communist insurgency. Then came 
independence for Singapore. Indonesia mounted Confrontation against 
Malaysia. The swirling currents of political changes swept me along. 
Would my colleagues and I have embarked on our journey had we 
known the hazards and perils we would face when we formed the People's 
Action Party in November 1954? Had we known how complex and diffi­
cult were the problems that lay ahead, we would never have gone into 
politics with the high spirits, enthusiasm, and idealism of the 1950s. We 
could feel the swelling pride of the Chinese in both Singapore and Malaya 
at the success of communist China. Yet, there we were in the 1950s, a 
small group of English-educated colonial bourgeoisie, without the ability 
to reach the Chinese dialect-speaking masses who were the majority, 
going headlong into the fray. How could we ever hope to compete against 
686 From Third World to First 
the Malayan Communist Party? We did not think in those terms. We just 
wanted the British out. 
We pressed on, oblivious of the dangers ahead. Our visceral urges 
were stronger than our cerebral inhibitions. Once plunged in, we were 
sucked ever deeper into the struggle. We had to fight the communists 
sooner than we expected, contending against their open-front labor, stu­
dent, and cultural organizations, all backed by their armed underground. 
We solved that problem by merger with Malaya in 1963 to form 
Malaysia, only to discover that the Ultras in the UMNO Malay leadership 
wanted a Malay-dominated society. This led to communal riots, endless 
conflict, and eventually separation and independence in 1965. We found 
ourselves facing Confrontation by Indonesia. After that ended in 1966, 
the British announced in 1968 the withdrawal of their armed forces. We 
overcame one problem only to be faced with an even more daunting one. 
There were times when it looked hopeless. 
We learned some valuable lessons in chose early years as apprentices 
in the exercise of power. We never stopped learning because the situation 
kept on changing and we had to adjust our own policies. I had the advan­
tage of several ministers who read widely and were attracted to new ideas 
but not mesmerized by them-Keng Swee, Raja, Sui Sen. We passed 
interesting books and articles we had read to each ocher. When we 
scarred, we were ignorant and innocent, but we were saved by being care­
ful to probe and test ideas before we implemented them. 
My colleagues and I forged our camaraderie under these intense pres­
sures. In successive crises, we had to put our lives in each other's hands. 
We trusted each other, knew each ocher's strengths and weaknesses and 
made allowances for them. We did not take any straw polls to tell us what 
popular sentiment wanted us to do. Our task was to swing the people 
around to support what had to be done so that Singapore could survive as 
a noncommunisc , noncommunal, viable society. 
I was fortunate to have had a strong team of ministers who shared a 
common vision. They were able men determined to pursue our shared 
goals. The core team stayed together for over two decades. Keng Swee, 
Raja, Sui Sen, and Kim San were outstanding . They were all older than I 
was and were never inhibited from celling me what they thought, espe­
cially when I was wrong. They helped me stay objective and balanced, 
Epilogue 687 
and saved me from any risk of megalomania which could so easily come 
with long years in office. I also had Toh Chin Chye, Ong Pang Boon, 
Eddie Barker, Yong Nyuk Lin, Kenny Byrne, and Othman Wok-capable 
men of integrity, dedicated to the cause. 
When we started in 1959, we knew little about how to govern, or 
how to solve our many economic and social problems. All we had was a 
burning desire to change an unfair and unjust society for the better. To do 
that, we had to win political power. Having gained it, we had to retain 
the support of our people to continue our unfinished job. 
I sought out able men and placed them in positions of authority as 
ministers and top public officers to administer an honest, efficient system 
and be responsive to the needs of the people. We had to keep the workers 
on our side and at the same time tend to the needs of investors whose cap­
ital, knowledge, management skills, and overseas markets would enable 
us to make a living without our traditional hinterland, Malaysia. 
We learned on the job and learned quickly. If there was one formula 
for our success, it was that we were constantly studying how to make 
things work, or how to make them work better. I was never a prisoner of 
any theory. What guided me were reason and reality. The acid test I 
applied to every theory or scheme was, would it work? This was the 
golden thread that ran through my years in office. If it did not work, or 
the results were poor, I did not waste more time and resources on it. I 
almost never made the same mistake twice, and I tried to learn from the 
mistakes others had made. I discovered early in office that there were few 
problems confronting me in government that other governments had not 
met and solved. So I made a practice of finding out who else had met the 
problem we faced, how they had tackled it, and how successful they had 
been. Whether it was to build a new airport or to change our teaching 
methods, I would send a team of officers to visit and study those countries 
that had done it well. I preferred to climb on the shoulders of others who 
had gone before us. 
In retrospect, it was our good luck that Singapore did not come to 
greater harm from some of the high-risk policies and actions that we 
embarked on. We worked with the communists in a united front; we 
could have been chewed up and swallowed as happened to social demo­
crats in Poland and Czechoslovakia after World War II. We acted in the 
688 From Third World to First 
nai've belief chat the force of electoral arithmetic would gradually bring 
about a less communal Malayan society; time has shown chat racial loyal­
ties cannot be overcome by the pulls of common economic interests. 
When faced with bleak economic prospects, I allowed an oil refinery at 
Keppel, thus placing a great fire hazard next to our major economic asset, 
the main harbor. And Chinese middle school student riots in the 1950s 
made such an indelible impression on us chat we postponed implement­
ing a national education policy with English as our working language 
from 1965 until 1978, and so reduced the economic prospects of many 
cohorts of Chinese students. 
I learned to ignore criticism and advice from experts and quasi­
experts, especially academics in the social and political sciences. They 
have pet theories on how a society should develop to approximate their 
ideal, especially how poveny should be reduced and welfare extended. I 
always cried to be correct, not politically correct. Foreign correspondents 
representing the Western media in Singapore preached their theories and 
criticized my policies, hoping to influence the voters and the government. 
It was just as well that the people were as pragmatic and realistic as the 
government. 
Would I have been a different person if I had remained a lawyer and 
not gone into politics? My work experience would have been more lim­
ited and my horizons narrower. In politics I had to range over the whole 
gamut of the problems of human society. As the Chinese saying goes, "the 
sparrow though small has all five organs." Small though we may be, our 
needs are the same as chose of any large country, domestically and interna­
tionally. My responsibilities gave me a wide perspective of human soci­
eties and a worldview chat a lawyer would not have. 
But I never allowed myself to forget Singapore's unique situation in 
Southeast Asia. To survive, we had to be better organized and more effi­
cient and competitive than the rest of the region or there was no reason 
for our role as a nodal point between the advanced and the developing 
countries. After everything had been analyzed and argued, I went by my 
gut instinct of what would work in Singapore. I had persuaded our people 
to oust the British and join Malaya. Then we found ourselves thrown out 
of Malaysia. Thereafter, it was our duty to make Singapore succeed and 
give our people a future. 
Epilogue 689 
A united and determined group of leaders, backed by a practical and 
hardworking people who trusted them, made it possible. Did I expect an 
independent Singapore, with a GDP of S$3 billion in 1965, to grow 15 
times to S$46 billion in 1997 at 1965 dollars and to have the 8th highest 
per capita GNP in the world in 1997 according to the World Bank? I 
have often been asked this question. The answer is "no." How could I 
have foreseen that science and technology, especially breakthroughs in 
transportation, telecommunications, and production methods, would 
shrink the world? 
The story of Singapore 's progress is a reflection of the advances of the 
industrial countries-their inventions, technology, enterprise, and drive. 
It is part of the story of man's search for new fields to increase his wealth 
and well-being. Stamford Raffles of the East India Company found an 
island of 120 fishermen in 1819 and turned it into an emporium on the 
sea route from India to China. As the commercial center of the British 
Empire in Southeast Asia, it prospered through international trade. 
When steamships replaced sailing ships, and again when the Suez Canal 
opened in 1869, traffic increased and added to Singapore's growth. 
During the Japanese occupation (1942-1945), shipping was drasti­
cally reduced by the war, amounting to a blockade. Trade declined precip­
itately, food and medicine became scarce, and half the population of 1 
million left for peninsular Malaya and the Riau islands. Many who 
remained were half-starv ed. After the victory of the Allies in August 
1945, shipping resumed, bringing food, medicine, and other essentials, 
and the dispersed population returned. Trade and investments brought 
recovery. 
With each technological advance, Singapore advanced--containers, air 
travel and air freight, satellite communications, intercontinental fiberop­
tic cables. The technological revolution will bring enormous changes in 
the next 50 years. Information technology, computers, and communica­
tions and their manifold uses, the revolution in microbiolog y, gene ther­
apy, cloning, and organ reproduction will transform people's lives. 
Singaporeans will have to be nimble in adopting and adapting these new 
discoveries to play a role in disseminating their benefits. 
People in Singapore learned quickly from their interaction with for­
eigners. We sent our brighter students abroad to study in developed 
690 From Third World to First 
countries, at first on scholarships given by these countries, later on schol­
arships given by the Singapore government. We also noted the increasing 
social difficulties these advanced societies faced because of their liberal 
social and welfare policies. I benefited from the lessons others paid for. I 
met many able foreign leaders who educated me and added to my under­
standing of the world. 
Getting together a team to succeed my colleagues and me was almost 
as difficult as getting Singapore off the ground after independence. The 
second generation leaders brought a fresh burst of energy and enthusiasm 
into the government. Their experiences and ideas are more in tune with 
the younger generation and can lead Singapore in the new millennium. I 
derive immense satisfaction watching them gain in confidence and get 
into their stride. 
What does the future have in store for Singapore ? City-states do not 
have good survival records. The Greek city-states no longer exist as states. 
Most have not vanished physically, but have been absorbed by the hinter­
land in a larger entity. The city-state of Athens has disappeared. But the 
city of Athens survives in Greece, with the Parthenon to bear witness to 
the achievements of the original Athenians. Other cities in big countries 
have been sacked and destroyed, their people decimated or dispersed, but 
the nations they were part of have endured and new people have repopu­
lated and rebuilt them. Will Singapore, the independent city-state, disap­
pear? The island of Singapore will not, but the sovereign nation it has 
become, able to make its way and play its role in the world, could vanish. 
Singapore has existed for 180 years since its modern founding by 
Stamford Raffles, but for the 146 years before 1965 it was just an outpost 
of the British Raj. It thrived because it was useful to the world. It is part 
of the global network of cities where successful corporations of advanced 
countries have established their businesses. To remain an independent 
nation, Singapore needs a world where there is a balance of power that 
makes it possible for small states to survive, and not be conquered or 
absorbed by larger countries. 
Peace and stability in the Asian Pacific depend upon a stable triangu­
lar relationship between the United States, Japan, and China. China and 
Japan have competing geopolitical interests. The Japanese invasion and 
occupation of China still trouble their relationship. The Japanese share 
Epilogue 691 
more interests with the Americans. A balance between the United States 
and Japan on one side and China on the other will set the structure and 
context for other relationships in East Asia. If there is an overall balance, 
the future of the region is more than fair and Singapore can continue to be 
useful to the world. 
I did not know when I started my political life in the 1950s that we 
would be on the side of the winners of the Cold War and that Singapore 
would enjoy economic and social progress that flowed from stability, 
enterprise, and links with the West. We were living through a period of 
immense political, social, and economic change. The most difficult years 
were from independence in 1965 to British withdrawal in 1971. Only 
when the main units of the British forces had left and we did not suffer 
severe unemployment did I feel we were less vulnerable. 
The future is as full of promise as it is fraught with uncertainty. The 
industrial society is giving way to one based on knowledge. The new 
divide in the world will be between those with the knowledge and those 
without. We must learn and be part of the knowledge-based world. That 
we have succeeded in the last three decades does not ensure our doing so 
in the future. However, we stand a better chance of not failing if we abide 
by the basic principles that have helped us progress: social cohesion 
through sharing the benefits of progress, equal opportunities for all, and 
meritocracy, with the best man or woman for the job, especially as leaders 
in government. 
Index 
Abdurrahman Wahid. See Gus Dur 
ABRI (Indonesian armed forces), 21, 
279,291 
Adams, Allen, 381 
Aeroflot, 447 
Afghanis tan, Soviet invasion of, 334, 
338,407,418,434,443,444, 
473-474 
Africa, 353, 359-360. See also specific 
African nations 
Aguiyi-Irons, J. T. U., 355 
Aiwa, in Singapore, 98 
Akihito, Emperor of Japan, 274, 484, 
504 
Alatas, Ali, 288, 389, 390, 484 
Albar, Syed Hamid, 252 
Albar, SyedJa'afar, 15,128,252 
Albright, Madeleine, 288 
Allen, Richard, 475, 476 
Alsagoff, Syed Mohamed bin Syed 
Ahmad, 11, 15 
Alwi Shihab, 289 
American Society of Newspaper Editors, 
194 
Amien Rais, 288, 289, 291 
Amin, Idi, 361, 366-367 Anglo-Malayan Defense Agreement 
(AMOA) , 44, 47 
Angola, Soviet aid to, 338 
Ancicorruption law, in Singapore, 159 
Anwar, Dewi Fortuna, 289 
ANZUS (Australia , New Zealand, U.S. 
treaty), 386, 401 
Apartheid, 363, 379, 382 
Apple Computer, in Singapore, 98 
Aquino, Benigno (Ninoy), 300-301, 
481 
Aquino, Corazan (Cory), 302-304 , 
482-484 
Arab-Israeli Six-Day War, 26, 52, 63 
Arab oil embargo: 
effect on Japan, 523-524 
effect on Singapore, 63, 68, 203 
Area Licensing System (ALS), in 
Singapore, 205, 206, 416-417 
Army Civil Service Union, 83 
Asahi Shimbun newspaper (Japan), 
490 
Asean. See Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations 
Asean Free-Trade Area (AFTA), 341 
Asean Regional Forum, 341 
694 Index 
Asia Europe Meeting (ASEM), 400 Au, Alex, 80 
Asian Development Bank (ADB), 480 Aung San, 322 
Asian dollar market, 73 Aung San Suu Kyi, 322, 323 
Asian Socialise Leaders' Conference, Australia : 
452 
Asian Wall Street journal, 191-193, 636, 
643 
Asia Pacific Defence Reporter, 29 
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation 
(APEC), 286, 431 
Asiaw eek magazine , 193 
Association of Muslim Professionals 
(AMP), 211 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(Asean), 329-341 
and Australia, 332-333, 387, 388 
and Brunei, 307 
and Cambodia, 327-328, 333-341 
and China, 578,599,601, 604-607, 
610 
cooperation within, 264, 269-270, 
300,331-332,339-341 
and Ease Asian financial crisis, 
343-350 
and Ease Timor crisis, 391, 392 
economic growth of, 282, 340 
and European Economic Community, 
424 
formation of, 268, 329 
goals of, 329, 330 
and Gus Dur, 289 
and India, 410 
and Indochina, 293, 296 
and Japan, 512,518 
and Korea, 5 31 
membership in, 341 
Myanmar in, 324, 341 
and Philippines , 303, 304, 482--483 
Soviet support for, 443 
summit meetings of, 331,341 
and Vietnam, 309-310, 333-337 anticommunist policy of, 452 
Asian policy of, 141-142, 388-389, 
394-397,400 
aviation policy of, 332-333 
in Commonwealth, 23, 36, 363 
and Ease Timor crisis, 389-394 
economy of, 387-388, 396 
in Five-Power Defense Arrangement , 
44,55,386,397,464 
geoscracegic goals of, 387 
leadership of, 394-398 
media in, 388-389, 392 
Singapore Armed Forces training in, 
28 
in World War II, 385, 392 
Australian Financial Review, 388 
Aw, Eileen, 138 
Aw Kow, 188 
Aw Sian, 189 
Azahari, of Brunei People's Party, 306 
Aziz, Sarcaj, 420 
Badawi, Abdullah, 391 
Bahamas, 367-368 
Baker, James, 475 
Balewa, Sir Abubakar Tafawa, 3 5 1, 3 5 2 
Balladur, Edouard, 430, 432 
Bambang, 280 
Banda, Hastings, 360 
Bandaranai ke, Felix, 414 
Bandaranaike, Sirimavo, 413--416 
Bandaranaike, Solomon West Ridgeway 
Dias, 413 
Bangladesh , 363 
Bani, S. T., 110 
Bank Negara Indonesia, 263 
Bank Negara Malaysia, 231,345 
Index 695 
Bank of Credit and Commerce 
Internacional (BCCI), 75 
Bank of England, 78 
Bank ofJapan, 529 
Barings bank, 77 
Barisan Sosialis party, 110-113 
Barker, Eddie: 
cigarette smoking by, 183 
and Devan Nair, 221, 222 
and Great Marriage Debate, 140 
leadership of, 687 
at Lee & Lee law firm, 682 
and Nanyang University, 150 
as Singapore minister for law, 213 
Barnett, Robert, 455 
Barre, Raymond, 426-427 
Barrow, Errol, 395 
Bases Economic Conversion Department 
(Singapor e), 53, 54 
Bacam, development of, 271-272, 283 
Beecham Pharmaceuticals, in Singapore, 
64 
Begin, Menachim, 473 
Beijing Review, 574 
The Bell Curve (Herrnscein), 138 
Belo, Bishop Carlos, 392 
Benelux countries , economic growth of, 
423 
Berita Harian newspaper (Malaysia ), 240 
Berlin Wall, fall of, 487 
Berlusconi, Silvio, 166 
Bhutto, Benazir, 368-369, 420,421 
Bhutto, Murcaza, 421 
Bincan island, 272 
Blair, Tony, 374, 377, 383-384 
Blakang Maci island, 54 
Board of Commissioners for Currency of 
Singapore, 78 
Bogaars, George, 23 
Bolger,Jim, 401,402 
Bolkiah, Hassanal , 306 Bolkiah, Mohamed, Prince of Brunei, 
75,307 
Bolkiah, Sufri, Prince of Brunei, 75 
Bonavia, David, 603 
Bosnia, 499 
Botswana , 360 
Bowring, Philip, 129 
Brande, Willy, 432-433 
Brazier, Jack, 83 
Brezhnev, Leonid, 473,631 
Britain: 
aid to Singapore from, 5 3-5 5 
anticommunist policy of, 452 
Asian immigrants in, 142 
bases of, in Singapore, 4, 33, 464 
and Brunei, 307 
colonies of, withdrawal from, 3, 490 
in Common Market, 397 
in Commonwealth, 23, 363 
ease of Suez policy of, 4, 31-44, 
46-47, 111,123 
economy of, 373-375 
educational influence on Singapore, 
375 
in European Economic Community, 
369,422 
in Five-Power Defense Agreeme nt, 
47, 55,464 
in Hong Kong, 547-554 
investments in Singapore, 63, 64, 
375-376 
Malaysian involvement of, 31-32, 35, 
453 
national anthem of, 685 
Rhodesian independence from, 
351-354 
and Singapore army, 14, 24-25, 31 
and Singapore trade unions, 83-84 
British National Health Service, 100 
British Petroleum, and Arab embargo, 
68 
696 Index 
British Trade Union Congress, 83 
Brown, George, 32, 34, 41-42 
Brunei, 305-308 
bank of, in Singapore, 75 
currency of, 231-232, 306 
independence for, 305-307 
Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 473-474 
Buddhism: 
in Sri Lanka, 413,414 
values of, 491 
Bukic Ho Swee, fire at, 97 
Bundesbank (Germany), 640 
Bundy, William, 452-455, 457-458, 
461,498 
Burma, 319. See also Myanmar 
and Asean, 293 
mulciracialism in, 320 
Bush, Barbara, 485 
Bush, George, 477, 478, 484-486, 488, 
630 
Byrne, Kenny, 687 
Callaghan,Jim, 37-40, 42,376, 
378-380 
Cambodia, 324-328 
and Asean, 293, 333-341 
government of, 324-325, 635 
India attitude toward, 407-409 
Khmer Rouge in (see Khmer Rouge) 
lack of human resources in, 136 
under Prince Sihanouk, 325 
Soviet involvement in, 418,443 
Vietnam invasion of, 296-298, 300, 
312,325-326,333-340,429, 
596,603-604,612 
Camp Temasek, 16 
Canada: 
Asian immigration policy of, 
141-142 
in Commonwealth, 363 
Caning, as punishment , 213-214 Carrington, Lord Peter, 34, 46-47, 307 
Career, Jimmy: 
and diplomatic relations with China, 
603,614 
and Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 
334 
and U.S. forces in Korea, 531 
and U.S. interest in Southeast Asia, 
336,471-474 
Carver, Sir Michael, 36 
Casey, William, 475 
Catholics: 
in Indonesia, 280-281 
religious education of, 648 
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), 
449-451 
Central Provident Fund (CPF), of 
Singapore, 77, 79,673 
British interest in, 383 
for health care, 100-101 
and home ownership, 96--97 
membership in, 104 
for retirement, 102, 103, 105 
Ceylon, 413-416. See also Sri Lanka 
Chan, Alan, 118 
Chan, S. K., 217 
Chan Chee Seng, 669 
Chan Chin Bock, 56, 59 
Changi airfield, 37, 55,201, 202-204, 
246 
Chan Sek Keong, 144 
Chan Yang Ling, 128 
Charles, Prince of Enr,and, 427 
Chartered Industrie s of Singapore (CIS), 
67 
Chase Manhattan Bank, 189 
Chacichai Choonhavan , 298--299, 
339 
Chavalic Yongchaiydh, 344, 345 
Cheney, Richard, 640 
Chen Shui-bian, 569 
Index 697 
Chew Swee Kee, 15 7 
Chiam See Tong, 125, 130, 133 
Chiang Ching-kuo: 
and Asian Development Bank, 480 
Deng Xiaoping attitude toward, 
610-612,614 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 560-564, 620 
and Singapore Armed Forces training, 
28,633-634 
and Taiwan nationali sts, 569 
and U.S. military support, 475, 476 
Chiang Kai-shek, 560, 562, 564, 566, 
569 
Chia Thye Poh, 114 
Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), 
77 
Chidambaram, P., 409 
China: 
communist influence in, 404,451, 
488,573,623,649 
Confucian values in, 491, 613, 639, 
657 
corruption in, 164, 621, 657 
Cultural Revolution in (see Cultural 
Revolution , in China) 
democracy in, 495 
diversity in, 591-592, 622-623 
economy of, 609, 612-614, 628, 
632,636,638-641,654-657,660 
and education , 658 
Europe relationship with, 434 
government in, 623 
Great Leap Forward in, 582, 655 
guanxi (personal relationsh ips) in, 
551,647 
health care in, 101 
and Hong Kong, 7,367, 547-548, 
550-557 
human rights issues in, 486, 488, 
493,495,551,659 
infrastructure in, 608-609, 656 investments in, 551, 632, 652 
Japan relationship with, 517-518, 
633,690 
in Korean War, 498, 540, 600 
leadership in, 624, 657, 658 
media in, 188, 574 
moderniza tion of, 605, 622, 
655-658,660 
Nixon visit to, 464, 465, 576 
party discipline in, 647 
ping-pong diplomacy of, 575-576 
racial issues in, 656 
revolutionary fervor in, 589-590 
rule of law in, 649,657 
Singapore relationship with, 273, 
274, 573-580, 585-586,606, 
617,631-634,642,645-649,690 
social problems in, 646 
and Southeast Asia communists, 329, 
338,599 
Soviet relationship with, 475-476, 
575, 596-597,601,612 
standard of living in, 621, 656 
Suzhou development project in, 
649-654 
and Taiwan, 475-477, 559, 
563-565, 567-571, 577,611, 
614-615,640-643,656 
three worlds policy of, 580-581 
and Tiananmen Square, 485, 548, 
551, 555,625-634 
tourism in, 609 
in UN, 464, 559, 577 
urbanization of, 656 
U.S. relationship with, 4, 462-464, 
475-481,485-488,493,496, 
551,614,629-630,639,658-660 
and Vietnam, 311,335, 339, 596, 
602,603,606,607,610,618,635 
wages in, 167,632,657 
Chinatown , in Singapore, 182 
698 
Chinese Chamber of Commerce, in 
Singapore, 147,149,231,577 
Chinese Communise Party (CCP), 5 7 3, 
574,582,584, 598,623--624, 
631,646,655--656 
Chinese Development Assistance 
Council (CDAC), 212 
Chinese language, in Singapore, 
147-153 
media in, 185, 186 
Chinese New Year, 181-182 
Chinese people: 
bias against, 23 
dislike of military, 16, 17 
and English language, 16, 146-153 
and Great Marriage Debate, 139 
in Indonesia , 261, 262, 264, 270, 
273,280-281,283 
in Malaysia, 574, 576 
and Mandarin language, 154-155 
overseas, 576-577, 598--601, 
605-606,626-627,655 
in Singapore, 22, 99, 135-136, 142, 
212,234,244,268,271,404, 
518,547,577,580, 584-586, 
593-594 
in Taiwan, 562-563 
Chinese schools, in Singapore, 136, 
145-150, 152-154 
Chin Harn Tong, 150 
Chin Peng, 116 
Chirac, Jacques, 426, 427, 430-431, 
438 
Ch'ngJic Koon, 150, 670--671 
Choi Kyu Hah, 532 
Chor Yock Eng, 669 
Christian missions, schools run by, 136 
Chuan Leekpai, 299, 343 
Chua Sian Eng, 178 
Chun Doo Hwan, 533, 534, 536, 537 
Churchill , Winston, 671 Index 
Citizens' consultative committees 
(MCs), in Singapore, 122, 123 
Clark Air Base, 28 
Clinton, Bill 
China policy of, 486, 496, 638--639, 
659 
and human rights issues, 278, 487 
impeachment of, 499 
and Indonesian currency crisis, 276 
and Michael Fay caning, 214 
relations with Singapore, 497 
Coalition Government of Democratic 
Kampuchea (CGDK) , 335 
Cohen, William, 659 
Cold War, 487, 488, 538, 691 
Combined Defence Council (Singapore-
Malaysia), 230 
COMECON, 596 
Commonwealth: 
Ceylon in, 414 
defense arrangement of, 36, 41 
defense ministers of, 23 
finance ministers of, 39 
prime ministers ' conferences, 31, 
351-371 
Singapore membership in, 14,351, 
357-364 
South Africa in, 360 
Commonwealth Heads of Government 
Meeting (CHOGM), 379, 382, 
394,407 
Commonwealth Heads of Government 
Regional Meeting (CHOGRM), 
387,406,407 
Communists: 
appeal of, 15 7, 404 
Chinese (see Chinese Communise 
Party) 
Chinese education of, 23, 114 
control of unions, 83, 92, 114 
failure of, 655 
Index 699 
in Indonesia, 262, 267, 269, 583, 
607 
influence of, 111-115, 121-122, 488 
in Malaysia, 240, 269, 582-584, 607 
and media, 186, 191 
moral agenda of, 163-164 
at Nanyang University, 577 
and PAP, 50, 108, 110, 117-118, 
121 
Singapore rejection of, 50, 109-110, 
117-119, 577 
in Southeast Asia, 269, 329-330, 
337,338,340,404,451-457, 
467,488, 598--600 
in Thailand, 115 
in Vietnam, 310, 313-315, 319,329 
Compaq, in Singapore, 98 
Computer literacy, 214-215, 527 
Confucianism: 
in China, 491,613,639,657 
in Japan, 491 
in Korea, 491, 533, 539, 540 
in Singapore, 488 
values of, 152, 348, 491 
in Vietnam, 314 
Congress Party (India), 405, 409, 410, 
412 
Conservative Party (Britain): 
and British economy, 375 
and ease of Suez policy, 31-33, 43, 46 
and welfare, 374 
Coomaraswamy, P., 217 
Corridon, Richard, 450, 451 
Corrigan, Gerald, 80-81 
Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau 
(CPIB), in Singapore, 159-163, 
647 
Cosgrove, Peter, 391, 393 
Council of the Association of Banks 
(Malaysia), 231 
Cox Report, 496 CPM, 114-118 
Cradock, Sir Percy, 549 
Crossman, Dick, 38 
Cuba, Soviet aid co, 338 
Cultural Revolution, in China: 
corruption during, 164 
deprivation during, 475, 655 
effect on Singapore of, 62, 110 
Gang of Four in, 600, 619 
leaders in, 604, 622 
Mao Zedong role in, 461-462, 575 
moral standards in, 657 
recovery from, 597 
Cyprus, 352, 365 
Czechoslo vakia, Soviet intervention in, 
575 
Davies, Derek, 129, 193-194 
Deaver, Mike, 474,475 
de la Mare, Arthur, 54, 202 
Delhi, pollution in, 412,418 
Delors, Jacques, 431 
Democracy: 
in China, 495 
in Ease versus West, 490-496, 635 
in Haiti, 494 
in Hong Kong, 550-551 
in Korea, 494, 541 
in Philippines, 490 
preconditions for, 663--664 
in Taiwan, 494, 495, 563, 564, 
569 
Democrat ic Action Party (OAP), in 
Malaysia, 232, 233, 244 
Democrat ic Justice Party (DJP), in 
Korea, 535 
Democrat ic Kampuchea (DK), 335, 
336,607 
Democratic Progressive Party, in 
Taiwan, 569 
Deng Pufang, 650 
700 Index 
Deng Xiaoping : 
appointees of, 624, 671 
and Cambodia, 337, 603 
and China restructuring, 445,475, 
476,517,589,601,606,627, 
639,645,649 
condemnation of, 587, 590, 627 
and Hong Kong, 367 
and Korea, 540 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 595-602, 
606--608,610-615,645 
removal of, 587 
Singapore visit of, 173, 297 
and Taiwan, 478--481 
and Tiananmen, 625, 627-628, 631 
U.S. visit of, 473,477, 603 
and Vietnam, 314, 336, 596 
Derian, Patricia, 488--489 
Desai, Morarji, 406 
Development Bank of Singapore (DBS), 
59,60,66,80,667 
Dhanabalan, S., 60, 130, 209, 667, 
672 
Djuanda (Indonesia prime minister), 
261 
Dobson, Frank, 381 
Do Muoi, 315-317, 319,635 
Douglas, Roger, 402 
Douglas-Home, Alec, 376, 377 
Downer, Alexander, 389, 393 
D'Souza, Edgar, 129 
Dunkel, Arthur, 431 
East Asian financial crisis, 256, 
343-350,497 
corruption resulting from, 170 
in Hong Kong, 346,347,539,553 
in Ma)aysia, 253-254 
in Singapore, 82, 133, 346,497, 
539 
in Taiwan, 346 Eastern Sun newspaper (China), 188 
East Timor, 269-270, 284-286, 331, 
340,389-394,540,583 
Economic Club of New York, 56 
Economic Development Board (EDP), of 
Singapore, 3 7 
business ventures of, 51, 63 5 
establishment of, 58-60 
under Hon Sui Sen, 55, 66 
and Japan, 508 
and Rollei, 65 
success of, 637-638 
Economist, 195 
Eden, Anthony, 671 
Electronic road pricing (ERP), in 
Singapore, 206 
Electronics industry: 
in Malaysia, 62 
in Singapore, 61-63, 65, 98 
in Taiwan, 389, 562 
in Thailand, 62 
in U.S., 499-500 
Elizabeth II, Queen of England, 
370-371 
Ellazari, Jak, 15, 26 
Employment Act (Singapore), 87 
English language: 
in Ceylon, 415 
and European Union, 438 
media in, 185, 188, 191, 195 
Singapore use of, 60, 142, 
145-156 
Enrile, Juan, 301, 302 
Esso, and Arab embargo, 68 
Estrada, Joseph, 305 
Ethiopia, Soviet aid to, 338 
Eu Chooi Yip, 16, 115 
European Economic Commun ity 
(EEC): 
Britain in, 369, 423 
currency of, 369,437 
Index 701 
Japanese exports co, 508 
protectionist policies of, 387 
and Singapore exports, 424-425 
and Southeast Asia, 3 7 3 
European Monetary Union (EMU), 
437 
European Union (EU), 423, 437-438. 
See also specific countries 
and East Asia, 431-432 
and Russia, 435 
Evans, Gareth, 338, 388 
Eysenck, H. ]., 667 
Fairbank, John, 460 
Falungong cult, in China, 656 
Fang Chuang Pi, 115-119 
Far Ease American Council, 57 
Far Eastern Economic Review (PEER), 
129, 193,222-223 
Farm resettlement , in Singapore, 
179-180 
Fay, Michael, 213-214, 496 
Federal Industrial Development Agency 
(Singapore), 227 
Festus, Chief, of Nigeria, 352, 
355 
Fiji, 361, 395 
Fine, Jonathan E., 127 
First National City Bank (Singapore), 
161 
Firyubin, N. P., 443 
Fischer, Stanley, 276 
Five-Power Defense Arrangement 
(FPDA), 44-47, 55, 246, 386, 
397,414,464 
Fong Sip Chee, 669, 670 
Ford, Gerald, 268, 468-469 
Foreign Affairs magazine, 537 
Foreign Relations Committee 
(Malaysia), 238 
Formosa, 567. See also Taiwan Fore Canning, preservation of, 
54-55 
Fortune Global Forum, 659 
France: 
economic growth of, 423 
Lee relationship with, 373-374 
Singapore ties with, 425-432 
socialists in, 428 
Fraser, Malcolm, 364, 386, 387, 396, 
400,406 
Free-market competition, versus 
socialism, 95, 105-106 
Freeth, Gordon, 46 
French National Employers' Federation 
(CNPF), 427 
Friedman, Milcon, 545, 640 
Fu, Fredrick Chien, 564 
Fu,James, 124 
Fukuda, Takeo, 507, 509-511, 
517 
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 460, 
461 
Gandhi, Indira, 370, 404-409 
Gandhi, Rajiv, 408-410 
Gandhi, Sonia, 409 
Gang of Four, 588,595,600,619 
GAIT. See General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade 
Gaulle, Charles de, 423, 425, 427 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT), 654 
General Electric (GE), Singapore 
facilities of, 62 
General Scheme of Preferences (GSP), 
for Singapore exports, 402, 424, 
511 
Genscher, Hans-Die trich, 424 
Gerakan parry, in Malaysia, 233 
Gerakan September Tia Pu/uh (Gestapu), 
in Indonesia, 262 
702 Index 
Germany: 
economic growth of, 423, 654 
economic relations with Singapore, 
432-437 
fall of Berlin Wall, 487 
industry in, 499, 500 
Lee Kuan Yew relationship with, 
373-374 
reunification of, 434-435 
in World War II, 515-516 
Geylang Serai: 
Malay settlement in, 207, 208 
race clashes at, 22, 23 
Ghana, 355-357 
Ghazali Shafie, 201, 228, 230, 325 
Gilchrist, Andrew, 21 
Giscard d'Estaing, Valery, 424, 426, 
437,597 
Glasnost, 444--446 
Globalization: 
and East Asian financial crisis, 348, 
349 
and Singapore financial industry, 80 
and Singapore political situation , 
133 
Goh Chok Tong: 
and East Timor crisis, 391 
and European economic relations, 
431--432 
and Gorbachev, 445 
and Gus Dur, 290 
and Indonesian currency crisis, 275, 
276,278-279,497 
Jeyaremam suit against, 130 
and Narasimha Rao, 409 
at Neptune Orient Lines, 666 
and 1981 election, 124 
and Points of Agreement , 250-252 
in Singapore chief justice search, 21 7 
in Singapore health ministry, 101 
and Singapore minister salaries, 169 as Singapore prime minister, 1 70, 
250,287,312,642,663, 
671--673,679--680 
in smoking ban, 183 
support for Muslim students, 211 
and Suzhou development project, 
650,651 
and Thai currency crisis, 344-345 
Goh Keng Swee: 
and army riot, 11-13 
and British east of Suez policy, 36, 
39,43,45 
Eu Chooi Yip friendshi p with, 115, 
116 
and Government of Singapore 
Investment Corporation, 77 
and Great Marriage Debate, 140, 141 
and health care, 100-101 
and home ownership issue, 96 
in Indonesia, 266 
leadership of, 686 
Malaysian birthplace of, 144 
and Nanyang University, 150 
Razak relationship with, 236 
as Singapore acting prime minister, 
203,459 
and Singapore army buildup, 14-20, 
24,26,27,33 
as Singapore defense minister, 200, 
559 
and Singapore financial industry, 72 
and Singapore industrializa tion, 61, 
66-67 
on Singapore ministerial committee 
for racial issues, 13 
as Singapore minister of education, 
153 
and Singapore minister self-renewal , 
668-670 
in Singapore ministry of interior and 
defense, 6-7 
Index 703 
and Singapore policy on Vietnam, 
458 
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 444-446, 514, 
612,628,631 
Gorton, John, 45-46, 385-386 
Goshi, Kohei, 525 
Government of Singapore Investment 
Corporation (GIC), 77-78, 217, 
376,670 
Great Leap Forward, in China, 582, 
655 
Great Marriage Debate speech, 135-141 
Green, Marshall, 466 
Group representation constituencies 
(GRCs), in Singapore, 209 
Guanxi (personal relationships), in 
China, 551,647 
Guinea (West Africa), French 
withdrawal from, 43 
Guinness, Singapore brewery for, 65-66 
Gujral, Inder Kumar, 412 
Gulf War, 485, 634-635 
Gu Mu, 173 
Gus Dur, 287-291, 394 
Habibie, B. J.: 
corruption under, 165 
and East Timor, 389-390, 392-394 
as Indonesia president, 282, 283-289 
as Indonesia technology adviser, 
271-272 
as Indonesia vice president, 279, 
280 
and Islam, 291 
Haig, Alexander, 476, 478 
Haiti, democracy in, 494 
Hammer communist party newspaper, 
114 
Hamzah Haz, 287 
Hanbo Group, in Korea, 536 
Hanke, Steve, 280 Han Nianlong, 618 
Hanoi, 317 
Harmoko, 281 
Harper's magazine, 62 
Harriman, Averell, 455 
Hartnett, Sir Lawrence, 67 
Harvard Business School, 460 
Hasan, Bob, 280 
Hasegawa, Norishige, 508-509 
Hashimoto, Ryutaro, 519 
Hasluck, Paul, 44-45, 398 
Hau Pei-tsun, 564 
Hawke,Bob,382,387,388,396-397, 
400,401 
Haw Par Brothers International, 74 
Healey, Denis, 31-37, 40-44, 52,365, 
385 
Heath, Edward (Ted): 
and arms sales to South Africa, 
359 
and British east of Suez policy, 43, 
46,464 
at Commonweal th conference, 
359-360,362 
and Jim Slater, 73-74 
Lee Kuan Yew relationship with, 
378,395 
and Singapore Airlines, 202 
and Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 
434 
Heeda & Company, 189 
Heimert, Alan, 459 
Heng Samrin regime, in Cambodia, 
333-339,607 
Heren, Louis, 454 
Herrnstei n, R.H., 138 
Herzog, Chaim, 247 
Hewlett-Packard (HP), in Singapore, 
61-62,98 
Hindu Brahmins, as Singapore 
immigrants, 135 
704 Index 
Hinduism: 
in India, 408 
values of, 491 
Hirohito, Emperor of Japan, 273, 371, 
505-506, 511 
Hitachi, in Singapore, 98 
Hicam, Musa, 246--247 
Hizaki, Nobuo, 522 
Hoa people, in Vietnam, 599 
Ho Chi Minh, 573, 596 
Ho Chi Minh City, 313, 314, 317-319. 
See also Saigon 
Ho Chi Minh Post and Telecoms, 
317-318 
Ho Ching, 681 
Hoemardani, Sudjono, 265 
Hoffman, Leslie, 187, 188 
Ho Juan Thai, 148 
Ho Kah Leong, 150,671 
Hokkien dialect, 146, 149, 154, 592 
Holbrooke, Richard, 472, 474 
Holdridge, John, 337,489 
Hole, Harold, 36, 39, 45, 357-358, 386 
Holyoake, Keith, 36, 385, 399 
Hong Kong: 
British leadership in, 547-554 
and China, 547-548, 550-557 
comparison with Singapore, 7, 
543-546 
corruption in, 547 
democracy in, 550-551, 556 
and Ease Asian financial crisis, 346, 
347,539,553 
economy of, 551-552 
ethnic Chinese in, 655 
foreign currency pool of, 72 
handover to China of, 367, 495, 548, 
551-553,556 
immigrants to Singapore from, 548 
investors from, 41, 51, 546, 5 51 
language in, 155 loyalties in, 555 
right of abode in, 555 
as Special Administrative Region 
(SAR), 547, 552, 554-556 
successful industries in, 55-56, 543, 
545,546 
Tianenmen reaction of, 627, 630 
Hongkong & Shanghai Bank, 547 
bomb explosion at (1964), 20-21, 
263-264 
Hong Kong Policy Research Inscicuce, 
555 
Hon Sui Sen: 
and British ease of Suez policy, 43 
and Government of Singapore 
Investment Corporation, 77 
leadership of, 686 
and Malaysian trading through 
Singapore, 237 
with Mao Zedong, 581 
resignation of, 665-667, 669 
and Singapore as financial center, 
72 
and Singapore Economic 
Development Board, 53-55, 59, 
66 
and Singapore industrialization , 66, 
67 
Ho See Beng, 84, 223 
Hosokawa , Morihiro, 518 
House unions, in Singapore, 92 
Housing and Development Board 
(HDB), in Singapore, 96--100, 
123,124 
Howard, John, 284, 285, 386, 389-394 
Howe Yoon Chong, 67, 130, 203, 204 
Hsiao-wu, 563 
Hsu Tse Kwang, 93 
Hu, Richard, 275, 343, 672 
Hua Guofeng, 579-586, 600,608,613, 
638 
Index 705 
Hughes, Richard, 4 
Human rights issues: 
in China, 486,488,551,659 
and cultural relativism, 635 
in Japan, 490 
on world agenda, 490--491, 494--495, 
499 
Humphrey, Hubert, 457 
Hun Sen, 324,327,339,340 
Hunter, Sir John, 54, 523 
Huntington, Samuel, 493 
Hu Ping, 628-630 
Hussein, Saddam, 485 
Hussey, Marmaduke, 196 
Hu Yaobang, 479,631,671 
Ibrahim, Anwar, 256, 279 
Ibu Tien, 274 
Idris, Harun, 233, 242 
Ieng Sary, 326 
Ikeda, Hayaco, 503 
Income taxes, 107 
Independent newspaper (Britain), 196 
India: 
Asian policy of, 404, 406, 407 
caste system in, 412 
conflicts with Pakistan, 351,412, 
421-422 
corruption in, 412 
economy of, 407, 409-410 
education in, 411 
Hindu influence in, 408 
leadership of, 408-409 
nonalignment policy of, 405 
recognition of Heng Samrin in 
Cambodia, 334 
standard of living in, 403,405, 
411-412 
Indian Administrative Service (IAS), 
411,412 
Indian Civil Service (ICS), 411 Indians: 
in Burma, 320 
and Great Marriage Debate, 139 
in Singapore, 18, 33, 99, 135, 142, 
143,212 
Indochina, 293, 596 
Indonesia: 
in Asean, 268, 329, 330, 339 
attitude toward Soviets, 334 
barter trade with Singapore, 49, 
230-231 
China relationship with, 273-274 
Chinese in, 261, 262, 264, 270, 273, 
280-281,283 
communises in, 262, 267, 269, 583, 
607 
Confrontat ion by, 33, 35, 39-40, 49, 
121,229-231,262,263,374,686 
corruption in, 165, 286 
coupin,8-9,262,269 
currency of, 260, 274-280, 343, 345, 
497 
Dutch in, 260 
and Ease Timor, 269-270, 284-286, 
331,340,389-394 
economy in, 266, 275, 282, 345 
and Five-Power Defense 
Arrangement, 44 
government of, 323 
and Gulf War, 485 
and Hongkong & Shanghai Bank 
bombing, 20-22, 263-264 
Japanese occupation of, 260 
presidential election in, 287-288 
separatist rebellions in, 259 
and Singapore, 7, 269-270, 27 3 
social unrest in, 281-283, 288 
Industrial Arbitration Court 
(Singapore), 85, 93 
Industrial Relations Ace (Singapore), 
87 
706 Index 
Information technology (IT): 
and media access, 196-197 
political effect of, 133 
in Singapore Armed Forces, 28 
in Singapore courts, 219 
widespread use of, 214-215 
Institute of Defence and Strategic 
Studies (IDSS), 288, 289 
Institute of Labour Studies (Singapore), 
91 
Institute of Management Development, 
World Competitiveness Yearbook, 
163,219 
Institute of Politics (Harvard 
University), 457,458 
Insurance Corporation of Singapore, 66 
Insurance industry, in Singapore, 89 
Integrated Air Defence System, 246 
lnterFET, 390-394 
Internal Security Department (ISO), of 
Singapore: 
reports on communists, 112, 
114-116 
reports on Malaysian trade, 230 
International Advisory Council (IAC), 
538 
International Herald Tribune ([HT), 129, 
131 
International Labour Organisation, 83 
International Monetary Fund (IMF): 
and Asean, 340 
and British economy, 365 
and China, 629 
and East Timor, 285 
and Indonesian corruption, 286 
and Indonesian currency crisis, 
274-280,497 
and Korea, 5 36, 5 38 
market access through, 654 
and Pakistan, 419 
and Thai currency crisis, 345 International Press Institute (IPI), 187, 
190 
Internet, 214, 256, 438, 656 
lntraco (Singapore trading agency), 238 
lran,473 
Iraq: 
invasion of Kuwait, 485, 634-635 
Japanese response to, 515 
Ishak, Rahim, 211, 270 
Ishak, Yusof, 186, 305 
Ishikawajima-Harima Industries (IHI), 
51,522-523 
Ismail, Dr. (Malaysian minister for 
home affairs), 229, 230, 238 
Ismail, Samad, 115, 240 
Israel: 
leapfrog trade approach of, 5 7 
Singapore embassy for, 26 
Singapore military training from, 
14-15,20,25,26 
and West Bank settlemen ts, 485 
Italy, economic growth of, 423 
Jaffna Tamils, 409, 413-417 
Jahidin, Hussein, 240 
Jane's magazine, 29 
Japan: 
and Asean, 512, 518 
China relationship with, 517-518, 
690 
Confucian values in, 491 
defense capability in, 513, 519-520, 
632-633 
economy of, 349-350, 510, 
512-513,515,529 
election expenses in, 165 
energy conservation in, 523-524 
foreign aid from, 526 
foreign investments by, 63-64, 375 
human rights issues in, 490 
and Indonesian currency crisis, 275 
Index 707 
industrial productivity in, 91-92, 
499-501, 522-526 
Kobe earthquake in, 529 
leadership in, 509-519 
Lee Kuan Yew relationship with, 
373-374,502-506,521-524,528 
national anthem of, 685 
occupation of Indonesia, 260 
occupation of Rangoon, 320 
occupation of Singapore, 213,218, 
385,501-503,689 
postwar rebuilding of, 498, 501-503, 
521-522,654 
royalty in, 504-505 
Singapore relationship with, 504, 
506--509,690 
social values in, 153-154 
and Taiwan, 567 
technology industry in, 526--527 
workforce in, 527-528 
in World War II, 385,392, 506--507, 
515-516,518-519 
Japan Productivity Centre, 91 
Jatikusomo, Lieutenant-General 
(Indonesian consul-general), 259 
Jayakumar, S., 209, 251, 252, 672 
Jayewardene, Junius, 368, 415-41 7 
Jek Yeun Thong, 675 
Jenkins, Roy, 38, 42, 423-424 
Jeyarecnam ,J. B., 124-125, 128-130, 
167 
Jiang Qing, 588,619 
Jiang Zemin: 
and China WTO membership, 
659-660 
and Hong Kong handover, 5 5 2 
and Korea, 540 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 635-643 
and Suzhou development project, 
650-652 
and Taiwan, 569 with Tony Blair, 384 
U.S. visit of, 496 
Johnson, Lyndon: 
and British ease of Suez policy, 35, 38 
character of, 455 
meetings with Lee Kuan Yew, 
455-456,461,498 
and Vietnam, 453, 457-459 
Johnson, Paul, 32, 42 
Johor: 
and Malaysian trade route, 237, 241, 
242 
reaction co Singapore Armed Forces 
buildup, 23, 24 
Singapore Malays in, 207 
Johor, Straits of, 179, 245-246 
Josey, Alex, 44 
"Jungle girl" riots, 190, 212 
Jurong Industrial Township, 51, 61,651 
Jurong River, 179 
Jurong Shipyard, 522, 525 
Jurong Town, 59, 181 
Juwono, Sucupo, 266 
Kaifu, Toshiki, 515-516 
Kallang Basin, cleanup of, 178-180 
Kamanga, Reuben,353 
Kamisese Mara, 361 
Kampong Glam historic district, 182 
Kampong Kembangan, Malay 
settlement in, 207 
Kampong Ubi, Malay settlement in, 
207 
Kampuchea, 325, 335,336,607. See 
also Cambodia 
Kapicsa, Mikhail S., 442 
Karimun island, 272 
Karcasasmica, Ginandjar, 285, 286 
Kashmir, 351 
Kaunda, Kenneth, 361,366 
Keating, Paul, 279, 386--388, 392 
708 Index 
Kelang, Pore (Sweccenha m), 237, 255 
Kenap, Rahmac, 208 
Kennedy, John F., 25 
Kennedy School of Government 
(Harvard University), 55 
Keppel, civilian dockyard at, 54, 688 
Keppel Corporation, 68, 90 
Khama, Sir Serecse, 360 
Khan, Ghulam Ahmed, 420 
Kheng Chin Hock, 147 
Khieu Samphan, 325 
Khin May Than (Kitty), 320, 321 
Khin Nyunt, 322 
Khmer Rouge: 
and anticommunists in Cambodia, 468 
and Cambodian leaders, 325-327, 
606--607 
capture of Phnom Penh, 295 
China relationship with, 311,601, 
604 
Malaysia recognition of, 269 
and Vietnamese in Cambodia, 
333-340 
Khoo Teck Puac, 75, 76 
Khuan, Andrew Chew Guan, 101 
Kidron, Mordecai , 14-15, 26 
KimDaeJung,535-541 
Kim Il Sung, 540 
Kim Jong II, 540 
Kim Jong Pi!, 537,541 
Kim Young Sam, 346, 533, 535-538 
King, Cecil, 44 
King Edward VII Medical College 
(Singapore), 136 
Kirk, Norman, 386,395, 399-400 
Kirkpatrick, Jeanne, 640 
Kissinger, Henry, 434,461,464,468, 
659 
Kobe earthquake, 529 
Koh, Tommy, 334,336,481 
Koh Beng Seng, 75, 76, 80 Kohl, Helmut, 431, 434-438 
Koo Chen-fu, 567 
Kopassus (Indonesian Special 
Operations), 277 
Korea: 
and Asean, 5 31 
and China, 540 
Confucian values in, 491, 533, 539, 
540 
corruption in, 5 36 
currency of, 346, 538 
democracy in, 494, 541 
and Ease Timor, 540 
economy of, 345, 349-350, 531, 
532,534,538-540 
history of, 5 32 
Japanese influence on, 532-533 
leadership of, 533-538 
North versus South, 531, 533-534, 
536,539-540 
U.S. troops in, 463,471,473,474, 
531 
vulnerability of, 533 
workforce in, 533 
Korean Central Intelligence Agency 
(KCIA), 537, 539, 541 
Korean War, 498, 521,540,600 
Kosaka (Japan foreign minister), 503 
Kosovo, 490, 499 
Kostrad (Indonesian Strategic Forces), 
280,281 
Kosygin, Aleksei, 441-442, 447,464 
Kotelawala, Sir John, 413 
Kriangsak, General (Thailand prime 
minister), 296, 297, 332-333, 
597,602 
Krobo Edusei, 355, 356 
Krushchev, Nikita, 631 
Kuala Lumpur: 
environmental campaign in, 1 77 
Guinness brewery in, 66 
race riots in, 22-24, 45, 233-234, 
397 
Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, 239, 
345 
Kukric Pramoj, 269, 294-296, 577 
Kumaratunga, Chandrika, 41 7 
Kuomintang (KMT), 563-565, 569, 
573,574,640 
Kurile islands, 514-515 
Kusumaacma dja, Mochcar, 334, 335 
Kuwait, invasion by Iraq, 485 
Kwik Kian Gie, 290 
Labor Party (Australia), 387, 388, 396 
The Labour G(Jl)ernment 1964-1970 
(Wilson), 358-359 
Labour Party (Britain): 
and arms sales co South Africa, 359 
and British currency, 39 
and British economy, 375, 378, 381 
and ease of Suez policy, 4, 31-35, 
37-39,43,46 
Lee Kuan Yew association with, 380 
and National Health Service, 100 
and Tony Blair, 374, 383 
and welfare, 374 
Labour Party (New Zealand), 401 
Lange, David, 401-402 
Langkawi island, 249 
Laos: 
and Asean, 293, 339, 341 
Pachec Lao in, 468 
Laciff, Jamal Abdul, 227 
Latin American financial crisis, 347 
Law Society (Singapore), 126, 127 
Le Due Anh, 316,318 
Lee, Dennis, 682 
Lee, Edward, 289 
Lee, Freddy, 682 
Lee, Marcin, 552 
Lee, Monica, 682 Index 
Lee & Lee law firm, 128, 682 
Lee Chiaw Meng, 150 
Lee Choo: 
China visits of, 581,587,617 
and Devan Nair, 220 709 
English language education of, 145 
with Fang Chuang Pi, 118 
with Gandhis, 409 
and Great Marriage Debate, 135, 139 
Japan visits of, 505-506 
law career of, 128,676,682 
medical condition of, 449 
with Nixon, 464-465 
personal security of, 5 
Phnom Penh visit of, 324 
property purchase by, 170-171 
Rangoon visit of, 320 
Russian visit of, 440, 442-443 
and Suharto daughters, 274 
as supportive, 675-676 
in Taiwan, 560 
Lee Ek Tieng, 178-180 
Lee Hsien Loong: 
career of, 28, 129, 679-681 
computer studies of, 215 
in defense ministry, 248-249 
education of, 677-679 
in Goh cabinet, 672 
and Habibie, 283 
health of, 681 
marriage of, 679 
and MAS reorganization, 81 
property purchase by, 1 70-171 
Russian studies of, 440 
U.S. focus of, 384 
Lee Hsien Yang: 
career of, 681 
education of, 677 
marriage of, 681 
Lee Khoon Choy (K. C.), 260, 264, 330, 
581,592,669 
710 
Lee Kuan Yew: 
Accra visit of, 355-356 
as anticommunist, 479, 560 
background of, 50,158,518 Index 
and British east of Suez policy, 34, 41 
with Bush, 484--486 
career of, 686-690 
with Carter, 471-472 
children of, 5, 145, 152, 155, 
676-682 
China visits of, 173, 578-593, 595, 
604,617-624,634 
Chinese position on, 575 
at Commonweal th conferences, 
351-371 
Confucian values of, 488, 489 
corruption allegations against, 
128-131, 170-171 
and CPF contribution rates, 96, 97 
with Deng Xiaoping, 595-602, 
606-608,610--615,645 
and English language, 145-156, 438 
environmental program of, 175-184 
with Fang Chuang Pi, 117-119 
with Ford, 468-469 
with Gandhi (Indira), 404-408 
with Gandhi (Rajiv), 408-409 
and Government of Singapore 
Investment Corporation, 77, 80 
and Great Marriage Debate, 
135-141,682 
and Gus Dur, 289, 290 
Hong Kong visits of, 543-545, 553 
honors received by, 376-377, 419, 
544 
and Indonesian currency crisis, 
275-277 
Indonesia visits of, 259-261, 266 
Japan visits of, 502-506, 511, 
521-524 
with Jiang Zemin, 635--643 with Johnson, 455-456, 461,498 
as J. P. Morgan board member, 79 
at Kennedy School of Government, 
55,459-461 
with Kohl, 435-436 
Korea visits of, 531-534, 538, 539 
law training of, 212, 217, 688 
with Lim Chin Siong, 113 
with Li Peng, 631-634 
Mahathir Mohamad relationship 
with, 242-243, 256 
Malaysia visits of, 238 
with Mao Zedong, 581-582, 585 
with Marcos, 299, 301 
meditation practice of, 513 
memoirs publication by, 252 
National Day speeches by, 125-126, 
135 
with Nehru, 403-404 
with Nixon, 461-465 
official privileges of, 167 
Pakistan visit of, 418 
Paris visits of, 427 
personal security of, 4-5 
Phnom Penh visit of, 324 
and Queen Elizabeth II, 370-371 
with Rahman, 227-229, 235 
Rangoon visits of, 320-321 
with Reagan, 474-482 
relationship with ministers, 199-200 
resignation of, 28, 170, 217, 249, 
274,663-672 
Russia visits of, 439-443, 445 
siblings of, 682-683 
Sri Lanka visits of, 412-416 
with Suharto, 264-271, 273 
Taiwan visits of, 560-561 
Tiananmen statement of, 626 
union policies of, 83-88 
U.S. relationship with, 373, 
449-452,498-499 
U.S. speaking engagements of, 
56-57, 194,458,481 
U.S. visits of, 454-466 
with Winsemius, 60-61 
with Zhao Ziyang, 608--610, 
612-613 
Lee Mau Seng, 148 
Lee Pan Hon, 13 7 
Lee Siew Choh, 110, 113 
Leeson, Nick, 77 
Lee Suan Yew, 682 
Lee Teng-hui, 564-570, 640, 641-643 
Lee Wei Ling: 
career of, 682 
China visits of, 581,587, 590-591, 
617--618 
education of, 677 
in Taiwan, 560 
U.S. experience of, 214,485 
Lee Yiok Seng, 150 
Lee Yock Suan, 60, 672 
Leghari (president of Pakistan), 421 
Lennox-Boyd, Alan, 66, 376 
Leong Mun Kwai, 241 
Levin, Bernard, 195-196 
Li, K. T., 562, 565 
Liberal Democra tic Party (Japan), 509, 
510,513,514,518-519 
Liberation theology, 115 
Li Changchun , 655 
Lien Chan, 569 
Li Lanqing, 641,651 
Lim Boon Heng, 91, 92 
Lim Chee Onn, 89-90, 92 
Lim Chin Beng, 201 
Lim Chin Siong, 109, 112-113, 118, 
125,646 
Lim Guan Teik, 254 
Lim Hng Kiang, 28 
Lim Hock San, 204 
Lim Ho Kee, 79 Index 
Lim Huan Boon, 110 
Lim Kim San: 
leadership of, 686 
and Nanyang University, 150 711 
and PAP candidate recruitment , 668, 
669 
as Singapore defense minister, 22-24, 
45,233,234 
as Singapore finance minister, 6-7, 
50,231 
and Singapore industrialization, 67 
Lim Kit Siang, 253 
Lim Suet Fern, 681 
Lim Yew Hock, 157,165,413 
Lingle, Christopher, 131 
Li Peng: 
on Khmer Rouge, 339 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 631--634, 638 
and media, 5 5 2 
and Suzhou development project, 
650,651 
and Taiwan, 568 
and Tiananmen, 625,631,634 
Li Ruihuan, 648 
Little India, in Singapore , 182 
London, postwar development of, 
427-428 
London Times, 195-196, 603 
Lon Nol, 328, 334 
Look magazine , 176 
Low Thia Khiang, 133 
Lugar, Richard, 483 
Ly Singko, 148 
Macau: 
Chinese in, 655 
investors from, 551 
MacArthur, Douglas, 299, 521 
MacLeho se, Murray, 547, 549 
Macleod , lain, 32, 43 
Macmillan, Harold, 369, 376, 377 
712 Index 
MacPherson, new housing site at, 98 in Asean, 268, 329 
Mah Bow Tan, 284, 390 attitude toward Soviets, 334 
Maintenance of Parents Act (Singapore), 
132 
Majlis Pendidikan Anak-An ak Islam­
Council on Education for Muslim 
Children (Mendaki), 210-212 
Major, John, 374, 382-383 
Makarios, Archbishop, 352, 365 
Malacca, Straits of: 
navigational freedom in, 26, 265, 
267,506-507, 511,605 
nuclear-powered vessels in, 401 
Malawi, 360 
Malaya: 
communist influence in, 111, 112, 
404 
Japanese invasion of, 513 
Singapore merger with, 686 
Malayan Communist Party (MCP), 112, 
117,123,267,573,576,582, 
584,600,604 
Malayan National Liberation Front 
(MNLF), 112 
Malay language: 
Indonesian use of, 271 
Lee Kuan Yew use of, 261,267 
media in, 185, 186 
Singapore use of, 146, 149, 155 
Malays: 
education of, 210-212 
and Great Marriage Debate, 139 
resettlement of, 206-209 
in Singapore, 18, 22, 33, 99, 135, 
143,234,244 
in Singapore Armed Forces, 12-14, 
16,22,247-249 
on Singapore police force, 6, 16 
Malaysia: 
anti-long hair campaign in, 237 
armed forces of, 11, 22, 23 British presence in, 31-32, 35, 
453 
Chinese attitude toward, 574, 576 
common market with Singapore, 
49 
in Commonweal th, 23 
and communi sts, 240, 269, 582-584, 
607 
currency of, 231-232, 306, 343, 
345 
and East Timor, 391-392 
economy of, 236, 253-254 
elections in, 164-165, 232-233 
electronics industry in, 62 
end ofTunku era in, 234, 235 
in Five-Power Defense Arrangem ent, 
44-46,386,464 
and Gulf War, 485 
and Indonesian Confronta tion, 33, 
229,262,263 
media in, 325, 340 
national anthem of, 685 
Pakistani antagonism toward, 351 
racial issues in, 13, 22-24, 45, 
233-234,236,253-257,599,688 
and Singapore Armed Forces, 16-17, 
19 
Singapore independence from, 3, 5-6, 
33,110,228,235,253,254,686 
and Singapore-Indonesia relations, 
228-230 
Singapore joining of, 3, 686 
Singapore relationship with, 45, 
237-238,240-242,246-254 
and Singapore water supply, 28, 228, 
244,246,251,254 
in Stock Exchange of Singapore, 
76 
suspension of Parliament in, 45 
Index 713 
Malaysia Airline System (MAS), 202, and Singapore Armed Forces training, 
243 28 
Malaysia Day, 118 
Malaysian Airways, 160-161 
Malaysian Chinese Association (MCA), 
232,233,239,675 
Malaysian Special Branch, 118 
Malaysia-Si ngapore Airlines (MSA), 
200-201,217,243 
Malaysia-Singapore Stock Exchange, 
238 
Malay Ultras, 6, 7, 24, 112, 199, 233, 
666,686 
Malik, Adam, 262-264 
Malta, British military withdrawal 
from, 52 
Management committees (MCs), in 
Singapore, 122, 123 
Mandarin language: 
in China, 591 
in Singapore, 145, 146, 149, 
154-155,271,635 
Mandelson, Peter, 383 
Manglapus , Raul, 483 
Manley, Michael, 364 
Mansfield, Mike, 455,456 
Mao Zedong: 
and China-U.S. relations, 464, 
477 
clothing style of, 167 
Cultural Revolution of, 37, 62, 462, 
589,622 
and Deng Xiaoping, 627 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 581-582 
little red book of, 575 
successors co, 666 
Marcos, Ferdinand: 
and communists, 269 
environmental agenda of, 177 
as Philippines president, 299-303, 
305,481-483 Suharto comparison with, 278, 282 
Marcos, Imelda, 300, 302, 305 
Margai, Sir Albert, 353 
Marriage: 
interracial, 143 
preferences of Asian men, 136 
among Singapore women, 136-141 
Marshall, David, 124, 213 
Marzuki Darusman, 289 
Mattar, Ahmad, 209, 211, 579, 672 
Maudling, Reginald, 43 
Mauroy, Pierre, 427, 428 
McCarthy, John, 390 
McEwen (Australia prime minister), 45 
McGovern, George, 468 
McMahon, William, 386 
McNamara, Robert, 38,455,457, 
464-465 
Medifund program, in Singapore, 102 
Medisave program, in Singapore, 
101-102, 107, 383 
MediShield program, in Singapore, 
102 
Megawati Sukarnoputri, 287-290 
Mei Siah, 127-128 
Menzies, Sir Robert, 369, 397-398 
Mercedes-Benz, in Singapore, 63 
Merdeka Palace (Jakarta), 259 
Michiko, Princess of Japan, 504 
Miki, Takeo, 504, 507-509, 514-515, 
517 
Military Technology magazine, 29 
Milosevic, Slobodan, 490 
Mitsubishi, in Singapore, 98 
Mitterrand, Fran�ois, 427-430, 438 
Miyazawa, Kiichi, 507, 516-518 
Mobil, and Arab embargo, 68 
Moerdani, Benny, 273, 282, 303 
Moertopo, Ali, 330 
714 
Mohamed, Mahachir: 
and Asean, 333-335 
and Ease Asian financial crisis, 343, 
345 
and Ease Timor crisis, 391 
environmental efforts of, 177 
and Malaysian money policies, 
164-165 
with Malcolm Fraser, 396 
and Singapore-Malaysia relations, 
242-257 
in UMNO, 234, 243 
Mohamed, Yaacob, 211 
Mondale, Walter, 278,473,497 
Monetary Authority of Singapore 
(MAS), 72 
GIC management of, 78 
leadership of, 670 
and Lee family property purchases , 
171 
licensing by, 7 4-7 6 
and media, 191-192 
reorganization of, 81 
and stock exchange crisis, 76 
and Thai currency crisis, 343 
Moore, Philip, 370 
Morita, Akio, 374 
Motorola, in Singapore, 98 
Mouncbaccen, Lord Louis, 3 70, 413 
MPR. See People's Consultat ive 
Assembly, in Indonesia 
Muang Muang Kha, 322 
MUIS (Muslim governing board), 
208 
Muldoon, Robert, 400, 402 
Mulroney, Brian, 382 
Multilateral Assistance Initiative 
(Philippines Assistance 
Programme), 304 
Multinational corporations (MNCs): 
in China, 641 Index 
in Europe, 425 
exports ro EEC countries, 424 
inJapan, 525-526 
language of, 156 
recruitment by, 668 
restructuring by, 64 
in Singapore, 57-58, 62, 65--66, 98, 
672 
and Singapore-Malay sia relations, 
246-247 
Munoz-Palma, Cecilia, 302-303 
Murayama, Tomiichi, 518 
Muslims: 
and Gulf War, 485 
in India, 408 
in Indonesia, 287,290,291 
in Nigeria, 355, 357 
in Pakistan, 421 
in Singapore, 211 
and Singapore army buildup, 15 
in Sri Lanka, 413 
values of, 491 
Muscad fishhook plane, in Singapore, 
52 
Myanmar, 319-324. See also Burma 
army in, 323-324 
in Asean, 341 
development in, 322 
Nagulendran, R., 221, 223 
Nahdlatul Ulama (Muslim 
organizat ion), 287 
Nair, Devan: 
arrest of, 115 
and Mahachir Mohamad, 243 
and Phey Yew Kok, 161-162 
as Singapore president, 124, 220-223 
in union leadership, 88-90, 92, 202, 
223 
Nakasone, Yasuhiro, 509, 513-514, 
517 
Index 715 
Nanyang (South Seas), 573, 574, 588, 
591 
Nanyang Siang Pau newspaper (China), 
148,186 
Nanyang Technological lnscicuce 
(NTU), in Singapore, 151-152 
Nanyang University (Nantah), in 
Singapore, 136, 147-152, 154, 
577,634 
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 15,371,452 
Nathan, S. R., 93, 222, 266, 288 
National Awakening Party (PKB), in 
Indonesia, 287 
National Bank of Brunei, 75-76 
National Day, 18, 23, 125-126, 
135 
National Iron and Steel Mills 
(Singapore), 66, 67 
National Neuroscience Inscicuce 
(Singapor e), 682 
National Operations Council (NOC), in 
Malaysia, 234 
National Party (New Zealand), 402 
National People's Congress (NPC), in 
Hong Kong, 555 
National Productivity Board (NPB), of 
Singapore, 524 
National Semiconductor, in Singapore, 
61 
National Service Ordinance (Singapore), 
20 
National Trades Union Congress 
(NTUC): 
consultation with Winsemius, 60 
cooperatives under, 89-91 
labor college of, 91 
leadership of, 88-90, 93, 223 
and Lee Kuan Yew's union policies, 
84,86 
and Singapore Airlines, 202 
and tourist industry, 1 77 National University of Singapore 
(NUS), 55, 131, 151 
National Wages Council (NWC), in 
Singapore, 88, 89, 97 
NATO (North Atlantic Treacy 
Organization ), 438, 490, 491 
Nee Soon military camp, 47 
Nehru,Jawaharlal, 37, 403-404, 408, 
452 
Neo Kian Hong, 391 
Neptune Orient Lines (NOL), 66, 67, 
666 
Netherlands: 
in Indonesia, 260 
investments in Singapore, 63, 375, 
435 
Neuscadc, Richard, 457-459 
Ne Win, 319-323, 606 
New Party (Taiwan), 564 
New Straits Times (Malaysia), 240 
New York Stock Exchange, 500, 529 
New York Times, 196 
New Zealand: 
anticommunist policy of, 452 
antinuclear stand of, 401 
Asian policy of, 142, 398, 401 
British influence in, 398 
in Commonwealth, 23, 36, 363 
economy of, 398-402 
in Five-Power Defense Arrangement, 
44,55,386,464 
leadership of, 399-402 
Singapore military training from, 25 
Ngee Ann College (Singapore), 147 
Ngiam Tong Dow, 59, 60, 89, 202 
Ng Kok Song, 78 
Ngo Dinh Diem, 25,451,456 
Ng Pock Too, 637 
Nguyen Co Thach, 396 
Nguyen Van Linh, 314,635 
Nguyen Van Thieu, 467 
716 
Nhan Dan newspaper (Vietnam), 310 
Nigeria, 351-357 
Nippon Electric Company (NEC), 525 
Nitisastro, Widjojo, 271 
Nixon, Richard M.: 
China visit of, 464, 465, 576 
election of, 459 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 461-465 
and Reagan, 4 7 4 
resignation of, 268 
and Vietnam, 462-463, 467 
and Watergate, 464, 467, 499 
Nkrumah, Kwame, 355, 356 
N. M. Rothschi ld & Sons, 77-78 
Non-Aligned Movement, 329, 365, 
407,413 
North Borneo, Philippines claim to, 
329 
NTUC. See National Trades Union 
Congress 
Nuclear weapons: 
Ceylon stance on, 413 
Pakistan testing of, 421-422 
Russia capability for, 447 
in Southeast Asia, 484 
Zhou Enlai stance on, 574 
Nyerere, Julius, 360, 395 
Obote, Milton, 353, 361, 366-367 
Official Secrets Act (Singapore), 195 
Ohira, Masayoshi, 511 
Olds, John, 80 
Olympics, 1980 boycott of, 444 
O'Neill, Tip, 481 
Ong Kah Kok, 67 
Ong Pang Boon, 151,669,670,687 
Ongpin, Bobby, 301 
Ong Teng Cheong: 
in Goh cabinet, 672 
as Singapore deputy prime minister, 
444,649,650 Index 
as Singapore minister for 
communic ations, 168 
as Singapore president , 214 
in union leadership, 90, 91 
Onn, Hussein, 238, 239-243, 256, 307 
Onn binJafar, Dato, 239 
Operation Desert Srorm, 485, 635 
Ople, Blas, 302 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD), 5 34 
Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation 
(OCBC), 80, 21 7, 667 
Overseas Chinese Affairs Commiss ion, 
574,576 
Overseas Union Bank, 80 
Owens, William, 281 
Ozawa, lchiro, 518 
Pakistan, 418-422 
and Bangladesh , 363 
under Bhutto, 368-369, 420-421 
economy of, 421 
India relationship with, 406,412, 
421-422 
and Singapore Commonwealth 
membership, 351 
Pan Electric Industries, and SES crisis, 
76 
Panggabean , General (Indonesia senior 
minister), 265-266 
Pan Malaysian Islamic Party (PMIP), 
233 
Panyarachun , Anand, 341 
PAP (People's Action Party): 
candidates of, 209-210, 667-670 
and communists, 50, 108, 110, 
117-118, 121 
continual reelection of, 105, 111, 
121, 123-124,672 
and election expenses , 165-166 
and farm resettlement , 180 
Index 717 
formation of, 685-686 
and Malaysian relations, 232-233, 
675-676 
media relationships with, 186--188 
moral agenda of, 157-159, 166--167, 
169 
noncommu nist opposition to, 
124-128, 131-134 
organizational network of, 121-123 
U.S. offer to, 450 
PAP Feedback Unit, 132 
Paris, postwar development of, 427-428 
Paris Peace Accord, 3 36 
Park Chung Hee, 371, 531-532 
Pasir Gudang, 23 7, 241, 242 
Pasir Panjang, 55, 179 
Pathet Lao, 468 
Patten, Chris, 384, 549-553, 556 
Paya Lebar International Airport 
(Singapore), 201, 203 
PDI-P (Indonesian Democratic Party-
Struggle), 287 
Peacock, Andrew, 333, 387 
Pearson, Lester, 357 
Pedra Branca, 245 
People's Association (PA), in Singapore, 
122, 139 
People's Bank of China (PBOC), 
639-640 
People's Consultative Assembly (MPR), 
in Indonesia, 165, 287-289, 291, 
390 
People's Daily newspaper (China), 574, 
579,585,602,658 
People's Defence Force (PDF), in 
Singapore, 18 
People's Liberation Army (PLA), in 
China, 579, 627, 628 
People's Party, of Brunei, 306 
Perestroika, 444-446 
Pernas (Malaysian trading agency), 238 Petrochemical industry, in Singapore, 68 
Pham Van Dong, 310,314, 598-600, 
635 
Phan Hien, 310 
Phan Van Kai, 317-319 
Phey Yew Kok, 161-162 
Philippines , 299-305 
Aquino incident in, 300-301, 481 
in Asean, 268, 329 
corruption in, 304, 482-483 
coup attempts in, 303 
currency of, 343 
democracy in, 490 
economy of, 300-304 
foreign threats to, 300 
Singapore Armed Forces training in, 
28 
U.S. presence in, 483,484, 598 
Philips: 
exports to EEC countries, 423 
Tao Payoh factory, 98 
technician training by, 68-69 
Pillay, Joe, 60, 68 
Findling, Sir Lynden, 368 
PKB. See National Awakening Party, in 
Indonesia 
Plaza Accord, 64 
Podgorny, Nikolai, 441,442 
Points of Agreement (POA), on 
Singapore-Malaysia land exchange, 
250-252 
Political and Economic Risk 
Consultancy, 220, 492 
Political parties. See also specific parties 
fear of association with, 122-123 
Singapore monitoring of, 115 
Pollution : 
in China, 657 
in Delhi, 412,418 
in Singapore, 178-182 
in Straits of Singapore, 507 
718 Index 
Pol Pot, 136,325-327,333,340,604, 
606 
Pompidou, Georges, 425-426 
Ponting, Clive, 195 
Port of Singapore Authority (PSA), 67, 
86--87, 124,203,204 
Post Office Savings Bank (POSBank), in 
Singapore, 106, 215 
Powell, Jonathan, 383 
Prabowo Subianto, 277, 280, 281 
Premadasa, Ranasinghe, 417 
Prem Tinsulano nda, 297-298 
Preservat ion of Monuments Board 
(Singapor e), 182 
Preservation of Public Security 
Ordinance (Singapore), 187 
Press Foundation of Asia, 190 
Public Daily Rated Employees' Unions 
Federation (Singapore), 85-86 
Public Service Commission (Singapore), 
215 
Public Utilities Board (PUB), in 
Singapore, 67 
Pulau Senang, as Indonesian trading 
center, 230 
Puthuchea ry, James, 238 
Pye, Lucien, 460 
Qian Ning, 658 
Qian Qichen, 568, 658 
QiaoGuanhua , 577, 584-586 
Qiao Shi, 648-649 
Qing dynasty, 50, 654 
Qin Shihuang, 462, 587 
Quaison Sackey, Alex, 356--357 
Quality control circles (QCCs), in 
Singapore industries, 91 
Quayle, Dan, 484 
Queenstown, new housing site at, 98 
The Quiet American (film version), 295 
Quinghua University, 116 Quinn, Brian, 81 
Qureshi, Saeed, 419,420 
Racial issues: 
in Africa, 353, 359-360 
in Burma, 319 
in China, 656 
in education, 210-212 
handling of, 13-14, 122 
in Malaysia, 13, 22-24, 45, 
233-234,236,253-257,397 
in resettlement , 209 
in Singapore, 13, 22-23, 234, 244, 
254-255,257,397 
in Singapore Armed Forces, 16, 123 
in UMNO, 253 
Radio Beijing, 110, 229, 574 
Radio Hanoi, 295, 310 
Raffles, Stamford, 50, 689, 690 
Raffles College, 115,136,145,236 
Rahman, Abdul, 6, 227-229, 235 
Rahman, Mujibur, 363 
Rahman, Senu Abdul, 241 
Rajah, A. P., 38,217 
Rajaratnam, Sinnathamby (Raja), 5--6, 
26 
and British east of Suez policy, 43 
Ceylonese birthplace of, 144, 228 
and Chinese relations, 5 77, 5 79 
cigarette smoking by, 183 
at Commonwealth conference, 352 
and Devan Nair, 221, 222 
and Great Marriage Debate, 140 
leadership of, 686 
and Malaysian relations, 232 
with Mao Zedong, 581 
multiracialist views of, 211 
and Singapore minister self-renew al, 
668,670 
and Singapore policy on Vietnam, 
458 
Index 719 
on Straits Times staff, 186, 187 
and Vietnamese occupation of 
Cambodia, 333, 334, 336 
Raman, P. S., 21 
Ramos, Fidel, 302, 304 
Ramos-Horta, Jose, 392 
Ramphal, Sonny, 363 
Ranariddh, Prince of Cambodia, 
326-327,339,340 
Rangoon,319-322 
Rao, Narasimha, 409-412 
Razak, Abdul: 
and Asian "brain drain," 142 
Australia visit of, 333 
and Chinese relations, 576 
and communises, 269 
and Five-Power Defense 
Arrangeme nt, 45, 46 
as Malaysia prime minister, 6, 
236-237,256 
and Singapore relations, 23-24, 228, 
230,234-235,238-239, 
675-676 
Razak, Najib Abdul, 252 
Reagan, Ronald: 
and China-Taiwan relationship, 
477-479, 562, 611 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 474-482 
and Philippines, 304,481 
speaking skill of, 5 3 5 
and U.S. interest in Southeast Asia, 
336,337 
Reischauer, Edwin, 460 
Residents' committees (RCs), in 
Singapore, 123 
Retail industry, in Singapore, 89 
Rhodesia, independence of, 31, 
351-354,357,363 
Richardson, Gordon, 7 4 
Rickover, Hyman, 472-473 
Rifkind, Malcolm, 550 Rioc(s): 
anti-Chinese, 190 
by army, 11-13 
by Chinese middle school students, 
20 
communal, 175,386,432 
and home ownership, 103 
"jungle girl," 190, 212 
in Korea, 534, 535 
in Kuala Lumpur, 22-24, 45, 
233-234,397 
Richauddeen, Tengku, 238, 334, 
484 
Robb,John,8, 12 
Rochore Canal, cleanup of, 179 
Rockefeller, David, 189 
Roh Tae Woo, 533-537 
Rollei: 
in Singapore, 64-65 
technician training by, 68-69 
Romulo, Carlos, 299-300 
Rose, Sir Alan, 216 
Roscow, Wale, 455 
Roch, Stanley, 284, 287 
Rothschild, David, 77 
Roy, Stapleton, 482 
Royal Air Force (RAF), presence in 
Singapore, 31 
Rubin, Robert, 659 
Rukunegara policy, in Malaysia, 236 
Rusk,Dean,450-451,455,456 
Russia. See also Soviet Union 
and European Union, 435 
Singapore relationship with, 
440-447 
U.S. relationship with, 487 
Rwanda, 499 
Ryzhkov, Nikolai, 444-445, 514-515 
Saac, Othman, 240 
Sadat, Anwar, 473 
720 Index 
Safronov, Ilia lvanovich, 440,441 
Saifuddien, Sir Omar Ali, 305-307 
Saigon. See also Ho Chi Minh City 
as economic dynamo, 313 
fallo�203,330,467,468 
Samoa, 395 
Samuelson, Paul, 460, 640 
Sandys, Duncan, 376 
Sato, Eisaku, 503-504, 506, 517 
Sayeed, M. J., 67 
Schmidt, Helmut, 433-436, 493-495, 
597 
Schmidt, Loki, 433 
Schulz, Siegfried, 28 
Scowcroft , Brent, 485 
Seagate, in Singapore, 98 
Seah Mui Kok, 87 
Securities Industry Act (Singapore), 76 
Seiko, Singapore plant of, 508 
Seletar airfield, 3 7, 5 5, 201 
Selkirk, Lord, 450 
Sembawang, dockyard at, 37, 54 
Senanayake, Dudley, 414-415 
Sencosa resort, 54, 114 
Seow, Francis, 126-128, 223 
Separation Agreement (Singapore-
Malaysia), 244 
Serangoon River, 203 
Serendip, 418 
Shacochis, Bob, 494 
Shamsuddin Tung Tao Chang, 148 
Sharif, Nawaz, 419-421 
Sharma, P. V., 115 
Shastri, Lal Bahadur, 15 
Shaw, Runme, 51 
Sheares, Benjamin, 449 
Shell Oil: 
and Arab embargo, 68 
recruitment program of, 668 
Shiba, Ryotaro, 565, 642 
Shipbuilding industry, in Singapore, 51 Shultz, George, 79, 304, 336, 338, 434, 
478-480,611 
Siabu Air Weapons Range, 273 
Siddhi Savetsila, 298, 339 
Sieff, Marcus, 52 
Siemens: 
exports to EEC countries, 423 
in Singapore, 98 
Sihanouk, Norodom, Prince of 
Cambodia: 
Deng Xiaoping relationship with, 
607 
leadership of, 324-325, 327, 336, 
606 
Lee Kuan Yew relationship with, 3 71 
Son Sann relationship with, 335 
talent of, 136 
Sikhs, in India, 408 
Sim Kee Boon, 68, 90, 204-205 
Simmons, Bill, 186, 188 
Sin Chew ]it Poh newspaper (China), 186 
Sindhi merchants, as Singapore 
immigrants, 135 
Singapore: 
air force of, 25, 31, 44, 45 
antispitting campaign in, 173 
armed forces of (see Singapore Armed 
Forces) 
in Asean, 268, 329, 339-340, 578 
Australian troops in, 385, 397 
Britain economic relationship with, 
375-376, 379,381 
in British Commonweal th, 14, 351, 
357-363 
in British Empire, 3,689,690 
British presence in, 4, 24-25, 31-47, 
52-55, 111, 123,373-376,451, 
458,464,691 
chewing gum ban in, 183 
China diplomatic ties with, 272, 273, 
559,566,568,606 
China relationship with, 273, 274, 
573-580,585-586,617, 
631-634,642,645-649,690 
cigarette smoking in, 182-183 
climate of, 176 
as commercial center, 689 
communist influence in, 111-119, Index 
121-122,441,467,577,584,686 
Confucian values in, 488, 647-648 
corruption in, 163, 170, 348, 
492--493 ,648 
currency of, 39--40, 81, 231-232, 
240,306,344,672 
and East Asian financial crisis, 346, 
497,539 
and East Timor crisis, 391, 393 
economy of (see Singapore economy) 
education in, 135-141, 145-154, 
210-212,375, 527,634,688 
elections in, 132, 165-166, 666 (see 
also PAP) 
electronics industry in, 61-63, 65, 98 
entrepreneurship in, 66-68 
ethnic Chinese in, 22, 99, 135-136, 
142,212,234,244,268,271, 
404,518,547,577,580, 
584-586,593-594 
Europe economic relationship with, 
423--425 
exports from, 402, 423--425 
financial industry in, 71-82 
First World standards of, 174-184 
in Five-Power Defense Arrangement , 
44--46,414 
foreign aid from, 526 
foreign investment in, 33, 41, 51, 
61-66,68, 79,637-638 
France economic relationship with, 
425--432 
future of, 690, 691 
geostrategic goals of, 387 721 
Germany economic relationship with, 
432--437 
and globalization , 80, 133 
government spending in, 106 
home ownership in, 95-100, 103, 
105,166 
Hong Kong compared to, 7, 
543-546 
Hong Kong immigrants to, 548 
independence of, 3-9, 110, 121, 228, 
253,254,404,686 
Indians in, 18, 33, 135, 142, 143, 
212 
India relationship with, 404, 406, 
409--410 
Indonesia economic relationship 
with, 49, 263, 275-279, 289-290, 
330 
and Indonesian Confrontation , 33, 
35,39--40,49, 121,229-231, 
262,263,374,686 
industrialization of, 49-52, 55, 
57-58,61-69,255,497,498 
infrastrucrure in, 106, 122, 174 
insurance industry in, 89 
interracial marriage in, 143 
Israeli consulate in, 15, 26 
Japan economic relationship with, 
504,506-509,526,690 
Japanese occupation of, 213, 218, 
385,501-503,689 
judicial system in, 212-214, 
216-219 
language of, 60, 142, 145-156 
leadership in, 664-673, 680, 
686-690 
Malaysia relationship with, 3, 45, 
237-238,240-242,246-254 
Malays in, 6, 7, 18, 22, 210-212, 
234,244 
media in, 185-197, 235 
722 
Singapore (cont'd ): 
minority groups in, 6, 8, 22, 
207-210 
as model for China, 645-649 
as model for Sri Lanka, 416-41 7 
multicultural values in, 15 3 
national anthem of, 685 
natural assets of, 8 
nature of, 3 
navy of, 25, 35-36, 40 
New Zealand economic relationship 
with, 402 
Pakistan relationship with, 
418--421 
Parliament of, 11, 110-111, 132 
pensions in, 102-103, 105, 666 
petrochemical industry in, 68 
Philippines economic relationship 
with, 300 
police in, 6, 12, 16 
pollution in, 178-182 
population growth of, 56 
president of, 170, 220-223 
productivity of, 91-92, 522, 
524-525 Index 
talent recruitment co, 142-143 
tariffs in, 63, 107, 23 7, 341 
taxes in, 107, 140 
technology in, 527, 689 
Thailand economic relationship with, 
343 
Tiananmen reaction of, 627, 629 
tourism in, 50-51, 177,609 
trade partners of, 49, 598, 642 
transportation in, 204-206 
unemployment in, 7, 8, 31, 44, 
49-51,55,62,63,93, 168 
unions in, 83-93, 114, 202 
urban renewal in, 182 
U.S. arms sales co, 471--472 
U.S. military bases in, 484 
U.S. relationship with, 4, 126-127, 
384,487,489--490,496-499 
U.S. troops in, 453 
and Vietnamese refugees, 395, 
467--468,488 
Vietnam relationship with, 309-319, 
339 
wages in, 167-170,527 
racial issues in, 13, 22-23, 234, 244, water management in, 178-181 
water supply from Malaysia, 28, 228, 
254-255,257,397 
reproductive races in, 139-141 
retail industry in, 89 
Russia relationship with, 440--447 
shipbuildin g industry in, 51 
size of, as handicap, 28 
social problems in, 647 
Soviet relationship with, 395, 
442--444,464, 577,578,598 
state monopolies in, 67-68 
street hawkers in, 174, 179 
and Suzhou development project, 
649-654 
Taiwan relationship with, 559, 566, 
568, 578,584-585 244,246,251,254 
wealth redistribution in, 
103-105 
workforce in, 86-88, 98, 107, 
142-144,227-228 
Singapore, Straits of, 401, 507 
Singapore Airlines (SIA), 60, 66, 68, 
200-205,243,245,332,416 
Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) 
building of, 6, 14-20, 24-29, 41, 
244 
common language for, 146 
in Ease Timor, 391 
equipment for, 14, 23-24, 47 
Lee sons in, 677 
Index 723 
Malays in, 12-14, 16, 22, 247-249 
racial issues in, 16, 2 3 
recruitment for, 27-28 
religious tolerance in, 27 
reserves in, 26-27 
riot by, 11-13 
training for, 27-28, 37, 386-387, 
559-561,585,633-634 
and Vietnamese refugees, 467-468 
Singapore Armed Forces Training 
Institute (SAFTI), 24 
Singapore Bus Services (SBS), 
102-103 
Singapore Democra tic Party (SDP), 125, 
133 
Singapore economy: 
British military contribution to, 33, 
36,41,44,52-55 
currency crisis in, 672-67 3 
growth of, 63, 107, 123, 166, 169, 
639,647,689 
postindependence evolution of, 7, 
106-108 
success of, 42, 68, 106, 381-382 
Singapore Factory and Shop Workers' 
Union, 112 
Singapore Herald newspaper, 188--190 
Singapore Indian Development 
Association (SINDA), 212 
Singapore Infantry Regiments (SIR), 11, 
16,25 
Singapore International Chamber of 
Commerce, 231 
Singapore International Monetary 
Exchange (SIMEX), 77, 81 
Singapore Petroleum, 66, 68 
Singapore River, cleanup of, 178-180, 
182 
Singapore Standard newspaper, 187, 188, 
190 
The Singapore Story (Lee), 252 Singapore Teachers' Union, 115 
Singapore Technologies, 67, 272, 681 
Singapore Telecom, 67, 103, 317-319, 
681 
Singapore Tourist Promotion Board, 
51 
Singapore Trade Union Congress , 92 
Singapore Volunteer Corps, 14, 25 
Singh, Manmohan , 409,410 
Singh, Natwar, 408, 409 
Singh, Swaran, 406 
Sinhalese, in Sri Lanka, 413--415, 417 
Siti Hardiyanti Rukmana (Tutut), 
275-277,280 
Siti Hediati Hariyadi Prabowo (Titiek), 
277 
Slater,Jim, 73-74 
Slater Walker Securities, 74 
Smith, Adam, 640 
Smith, Arnold, 351,362,363 
Smith, Chris, 383 
Smith, Ian, 353 
Social Action Party, in Thailand, 294 
Social Democra tic Party (SPD), in 
Germany, 434 
Social Development Section (SDS), in 
Singapore, 139 
Social Development Unit (SDU), in 
Singapore, 138--139 
Socialism: 
in France, 428 
versus free-market competition, 95, 
105-106 
Soemitro, Lieutenant- General (Indonesia 
National Security Command), 
265 
Solarz, Stephen, 338 
Son Sann, 335, 338, 606, 607 
Sony, 374 
Soong, James, 569 
Soros, George, 343, 345 
724 Index 
South Africa: 
and apartheid, 382, 537 
arms sales to, 359, 362 
British interests in, 354, 360-361 
in Commonweal th, 360 
spores boycott of, 400 
South Asian Association for Regional 
Cooperation (SAARC), 330 
Southeast Asia: 
anti-Japanese sentiment in, 510,518 
British presence in, 31--43 
colonization in, 293 
communi sm in, 269, 329-330, 337, 
338,340,404,451--457,467, 
488,598-600 
current political realities of, 133 
English language in, 152 
ethnic Chinese in, 491, 574, 598-600 
after fall of Saigon, 203, 467 
financial crisis in, 343-350 
industrializ ation of, 498 
official corruption in, 158, 163 
Singapore role in, 267, 268, 689 
Soviet influence in, 575, 597-598 
U.S. presence in, 465, 487 
Vietnamese attitude coward, 
309-310 
South Pacific Forum, 392 
Soviet Union. See also Russia 
Afghanistan invasion by, 334, 338, 
407,418,434,443,444,473--474 
anti-American propaganda by, 4 
China relationship with, 475--476, 
575,596-597,601,612 
as Commonweal th threat, 361 
disintegration of, 446--447, 488, 493 
economy of, 444--446, 512 
India relationship with, 405 
powero�428--430,438,607-608 
Singapore relationship with, 395, 
442--444,464,577,578 and Southeast Asia communises, 329, 
338 
technological superiority of, 439 
and U.S. Scar Wars program, 480 
and Vietnamese occupation of 
Cambodia, 443, 603-604 
Vietnam relationship with, 338, 596, 
605 
in World War II, 442 
Special assistance plan (SAP), for 
Chinese instruction, 154 
Special Branch (Singapore intelligence), 
449--451 
Spraclys islands, claims of, 341, 484 
Spycatcher (Wright), 195 
Spydar Securities, 74 
Sril..anka,368,409,413--418 
Standard Chartered Bank of London, 
76 
Scace Law and Order Restoration 
Council (SLORC), in Myanmar, 
322 
Stephens, Donald (Faud), 189 
Stewart, Michael, 32 
Stock Exchange of Singapore (SES): 
Black Monday (1987) on, 77 
crisis in, 76 
and Lee family property purchases, 71 
merger with SIMEX, 81 
split from Malaysia-Singapore Stock 
Exchange, 238--239 
stocks on, 54, 68 
Stock Exchange of Singapore Dealing in 
Automated Quotation Systems 
(SESDAQ), 191 
Straits Times (Singapore), 60, 185-188 
Subandrio (Indonesia foreign minister), 
261,262 
Subic Bay, 483 
Suez Canal, 52, 689 
Sugica, Ichiji, 513 
Index 725 
Suharto: 
and Asean, 303, 307,330,331 
and Batam development project, 
271-272 
death of wife of, 27 4 
and East Asian financial crisis, 348 
and East Timor, 392 
environmental agenda of, 177 
and Hongkong & Shanghai Bank 
bombing, 20 
and Indonesian corruption, 165 
and Indonesian coup, 9, 262 
and Indonesian currency crisis, 
275-280,497 
as Indonesia president, 263-271, 
273-274,280,323,331,607 
and Islam, 291 
Lee Kuan Yew honors from, 3 71 
privileges to family of, 277-278, 282 
resignation of, 280-282, 343 
and Vietnam, 334, 468 
Sukarno,37,259-262,287,291,329, 
452 
Sumitomo Chemical Corporation, 
508-509 
Summers , Lawrence, 276,278,497 
Sun, Y. S., 565 
Suppiah, K., 85-86 
Sutherland , Peter, 431 
Suzhou Industrial Park (SIP), 649-654 
Suzhou New District (SND), 652 
Suzuki, Zenko, 512 
Swan & Hunter, 35-37, 54, 523 
Swettenham, Port (Kelang), 23 7, 25 5 
Taff, Ahmad Haji, 229 
Taiwan: 
Chinese in, 562-563, 655 
democracy in, 494, 495, 563, 564, 
567 
and East Asian financial crisis, 346 economy of, 561-562 
education in, 562, 568 
elections in, 164, 565-566, 569 
electronics industry in, 389, 562 
independence of, 563-565, 567-571, 
577,611,614--615,641--643,656 
industrialization of, 498, 561 
investors from, 51, 5 51, 630 
Japan relationship with, 567 
and Nixon visit to China, 464, 465 
refugee flow into, 544 
secret societies in, 565-566 
Singapore Armed Forces training in, 
28,559-561,633--634 
standard of living in, 621 
Tiananmen reaction of, 627 
2-28 incident in, 565 
in UN, 640--641 
U.S. relationship to, 475-481, 569, 
570,611,614,660 
Taiwan Relations Act, 614--615 
Takeshita, Noboru, 514-515 
Tambyah, J. A., 220 
Tamils: 
language of, in Singapore, 146, 155, 
186 
in Sri Lanka, 409, 413-417 
Tamil United Liberation Front, 417 
Tan, Ton� 140,168,667,672 
Tanah Melayu (Malay land), 253 
Tanaka, Kakuei, 507, 509-510 
Tan Cheang Wan, 129 
Tang Liang Hong, 129-130 
Tanjong Pagar, 249-251 
Tanjung, Akbar, 287, 289 
Tan Kia Gan, 160-161 
Tan Lark Sye, 149 
Tan Siew Sin, 14, 66,231,232,237 
Tan Teck Chwee, 668 
Tan Teck Khim, 20 
Tan Wah Piow, 114-115 
726 
Tanzania, 360 
Tao Payoh, new housing site at, 98 
Tariffs: 
on imports, 107,237 
Singapore phaseout of, 63, 341 
Tarling, Richard, 74 
Taxi industry: 
in Hong Kong, 554 
in Pakistan, 420 
in Singapore, 89, 174 
Tea industry, in Sri Lanka, 415--416 
Teh Cheang Wan, 99, 162-163, 179 
Teh Kok Peng, 78 
Telok Kurau English School, 240 
Teng, Teresa, 621 
Tengah airfield, 3 7, 201 Index 
Thomson, George, 40--41, 379, 399 
Thomson, Roy, 189 
Tiananmen Square protests, 486, 548, 
551,555,625-634 
Time magazine, 62, 191 
Tiong Bahm, new housing site at, 98 
Tiran, Straits of, 26 
Toh Chin Chye: 
and British east of Suez policy, 43 
and Great Marriage Debate, 137 
leadership of, 687 
Malaysian birthplace of, 144, 228 
and Nanyang University, 150 
and Singapore-Indonesia relations, 
228 
Tentara Nasional Indonesia (TNI), 287, as Singapore deputy prime minister, 
6 
393 
Teo Chee Hean, 28, 215, 283-284 
Tet offensive, 458--459 
Texas Instruments, 61, 89 
Thailand,293-299 
in Asean, 268, 329, 339 
communist cadres in, 115 
currency of, 82, 274, 343-345 
economy in, 297, 345 
election expenses in, 164, 299 
electronics industry in, 62 
foreign threats to, 293 
Singapore relationship with, 
296-297 
support for U.S., 293-295 
and Vietnam War, 293-298, 457, 
463,468,598 
Thanin (Thailand prime minister), 1 77 
Thanom Kittikachorn, 293-294 
Than Shwe, 323 
Thatcher, Margaret, 307,367,374, 
380-383,400 
Thean, L. P., 217 
Thomas, George, 380 as Singapore minister for health, 101 
and Singapore minister self-renewal , 
669-670 
Tojo, Hideki, 519 
Tokyo,502-503 
Tonga,395 
Tourist industry: 
in China, 609 
in Singapore, 50-51, 1 77, 609 
Trade Unions Act (Singapore), 87, 
161 
Tran Due Luong, 318, 319 
Transparenc y International, 163, 492 
Tree Planting Day (Singapore), 1 77 
Trisakti University (Indonesia), 281 
Trudeau, Pierre, 362, 363,395,459 
Truong Tan Sang, 318 
Tung Chee-hwa, 552-555 
Uganda,360,361,366 
UMNO (United Malay National 
Organisation) 
anti-Singapore sentiment of, 
229-230,232-233,243,252,255 
leaders of, 15, 128, 236, 240-242, 
256,675 
and money policies, 164-165 
and multiracialism, 253 
and Straits Times, 188 
Ultras in, 6, 7, 24, 112,199,233, 
666,686 
UN Assistance Mission to Ease Timor 
(UNAMET), 390 
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea 
(UNCLOS ), 507 
UNESCO,640 
Unions: 
in Britain, 380, 381 
Korean versus Japanese, 533 
in Singapore, 83-93, 114, 202 
United Kingdom, in Five-Power 
Defense Arrangement, 44 
United Malay National Organisation. Index 
SeeUMNO 
United Nations (UN): 
and Arab-Israeli Six-Day War, 26 
and armed interventions, 407 
and Cambodian elections, 324, 337 
China admission to, 464, 559, 577 
Democratic Kampuchea in, 607 
and Ease Timor, 390-394 
Japan in, 517 
Khmer Rouge in, 333-334 
and Kosovo, 490 
Singapore-Mala ysia Separation 
Agreement held by, 244 
Singapore recognition by, 5, 6, 14 
Taiwan in, 640-641 
and Vietnam, 336, 395 
United Nations Development Program 
(UNDP), 49-50 
United Overseas Bank, 80 
United Scates: 
administrative appointments in, 168 
and Asean, 330, 336 Asian immigration policy of, 141, 
142 727 
and British ease of Suez policy, 32, 
34-35 
and Cambodia, 336-339 
China relationship with, 4, 462-464, 
475-481,485-488,493,496, 
551,614,629-630,639, 
658-660 
in CIA bribery scandal, 449-451 
consumer values of, 15 3 
currency of, 343-344 
and Ease Timor, 391-393 
economy of, 500, 529 
freedom of press in, 192, 194, 492 
global position of, 498-500, 691 
high-tech industry in, 499-500 
human rights issues in, 490, 499 
and Indonesian currency crisis, 
276-278 
influence on Europe, 429 
influence on Singapore, 384 
investments in Singapore, 63, 375 
involvement in Singapore policies, 
126-127 
in Korean War, 498, 600 
Lee Kuan Yew relationship with, 
373,449-452 
military bases in Singapore, 484 
multinational corporations of, 5 7, 62 
Myanmar position of, 323 
and Philippines, 303, 304, 483, 484, 
598 
reaction co caning, 214,496 
ship repair facilities in Singapore, 54 
Singaporeans educated in, 375 
Singapore Armed Forces training in, 
28 
social problems in, 491-492, 500 
and Southeast Asia communises, 
451-455 
728 Index 
United States (cont'd ): 
and Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, 
334 
Scar Wars defense program of, 480 
and Taiwan, 569, 570, 603, 611, 
614,660 
tobacco lobby in, 182, 183 
and Vietnam War, 4, 32, 37, 42, 141, 
264-265,268,293-294,336, 
358,395,452-459,462-468, 
498,598 
University of Malaya in Singapore, 
136 
University of Singapore, 150, 151, 154, 
511 
UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia 
(UNTAC), 339 
U Nu, 319-320 
Upadic Pachariyangkun, 296--297 
Uruguay Round, 431 
U.S. Commodity Futures Trading 
Commission, 77 
U.S. Federal Reserve Bank, 640 
U.S. News & World Report, 62 
Utusan Melayu newspaper (Malaysia), 
128, 186,207,229-230,235, 
237,678 
Values, Asian versus Western, 490-492, 
540,635 
Vance, Cyrus, 336 
Van Oenen (vice president, Singapore 
Bank of America), 71-72, 75 
Ver, Fabian, 305 
Vernon, Ray, 55,460 
Vietnam, 309-319, 357-358 
in Asean, 341 
bureaucracy in, 316 
Cambodia invasion by, 296--298 , 
300,325-326,333-340,429, 
596,603-604,612 and China, 311, 339,596,602,603, 
606,607,610,618 
and communi sm, 310, 313-315, 
319,329 
Confucian values in, 314,491 
currency of, 319 
development in, 31 7-318, 429-430 
economy of, 311-313, 315,317,338 
ethnic Chinese in, 599 
foreign threats co, 316 
India policy toward, 407 
leadership of, 314-316, 318,430 
refugees from, 395, 398, 467-468, 
488 
Soviet support of, 338, 443, 596, 605 
Vietnam War, 293-298, 31 7 
and Asean, 329 
British attitude coward, 35, 39 
danger co Singapore from, 56, 386 
Tee offensive in, 458-459 
Thailand role in, 293-298 
U.S. involvement in, 4, 32, 37, 42, 
141,264-265,268,293-294, 
336,358,395,452-459, 
462-468,498,598 
Vijiaratnam , A., 204 
Viraca, Cesar, 301, 302 
Volcker, Paul, 277 
Vo Van Kiec, 312-316, 318 
Wanandi , Sofyan, 280-281 
Wang Daohan, 567 
Wardhana, Ali, 271 
Warner, Denis, 3 
Water Agreement (Singapore-Mala ysia), 
246 
Watergate, 464,467,468,474 
Watson, Neville, 54 
Watson, Ogilvy, 74 
Wee Chong Jin, 216--218 
Wee Toon Boon, 161 
Index 729 
Weinberger, Caspar, 475,611 
Welfare state, cost of, 104-105 
Whiclam, Gough, 386, 392, 394-396 
Wilson, David, 547-549 
Wilson, Harold: 
as author, 358-359 
and BCCI, 75 
and British east of Suez policy, 4, 29, 
31-43, 377 
Lee Kuan Yew relationship with, 8, 
371,376,377 
overture to France, 422 
and Rhodesian independe nce, 353, 
354 
Winsemius, Albert, 49-50, 54, 180 
as economic adviser, 56--57, 60--61, 
89 
and Singapore as financial center, 
71-72 
and Singapore Economic 
Development Board, 58-59 
Wiranto, 280, 281, 287, 288, 290 
Wisma Pucra (Malaysian foreign 
ministry), 245 
Wok, Othman, 13, 211, 687 
Wolfensohn, James, 78 
Wolfowitz, Paul, 479 
Wong Chooi Sen, 5 
Wong Kan Seng, 445, 672 
Wong Meng Quang, 508 
Wong Ming Yang, 679 
Wong Yew Kwan, 178 
Woodhull, Sandra, 238 
Woodlands, customs checkpoint at, 
249-251 
Woon, Walter, 132 
Workers' Party (Singapore), 114, 117, 
124,133,148 
World Bank, 286, 312, 340,364,464, 
538,629,640 World Trade Organization (WTO), 349, 
496, 538,546,654,659-660 
Wright, Peter, 195 
Xu Weicheng, 646--648 
Yamashita, Tomoyuki, 513,514 
Yang Shangkun, 486 
Yatim, Rais, 248 
Yazhou Zhoukan (Asian Weekly), 129, 
130 
Yeltsin, Boris, 487, 631 
Yeo, George, 28, 290, 483, 672 
Yeo, Philip, 65, 67 
Yeo Cheow Tong, 60, 672 
Yeo Ning Hong, 672 
Yong, Edward, 23 
Yong Nyuk Lin, 687 
Yong Pung How, 24, 78, 144, 217-219 
Yu Kuo-hwa, 565, 569 
Zadari, Asif Ali, 420, 421 
Zadari, Asif Azad, 368 
Zainuddin, Daim, 247,249,250,255, 
279 
Zakaria, Fareed, 5 3 7 
Zambia, 361, 365-366 
Zhang Xinsheng, 649--650 
Zhao Ziyang: 
Deng Xiaoping selection of, 624, 671 
with Lee Kuan Yew, 604--605, 
608--610,612-613,638 
at Tiananmen, 625, 630--631 
and U.S., 478, 479 
and Vietnam, 336--337 
Zhou Enlai, 296, 574, 576--579, 586, 
587,631 
Zhu Rongji, 446,496,569,641, 
650--651,659 
Zia al-Haq, 418-419 
USA $35.00 
CANADA $52.95 
"Lee Kuan Yew is one of the seminal figures 
of Asia, and this book does justice to his 
extraordinary accompl ishments. Describing 
the motivations and concepts that have 
animated his conduct and explaining specific actions, 
he will undoubt edly raise many controversies. 
But whether one agrees or not, one will 
learn a great deal. "-DR. HENRY A. KISSINGER 
Few gave tiny Singapore much chance of survival when 
it was granted independence in 1965. How is it, then, 
chat today the former British colonial trading post is a 
thriving Asian metropol is with not only the world's 
number one airline, best airport, and busiest pore of 
trade, bur also the world's fourth-highest per capita real 
income? 
The story of char transformation is told here by 
Singapore's charismatic, controversial founding father, 
Lee Kuan Yew. Rising from a legacy of divisive colonialism, 
the devastation of the Second World War, and general 
poverty and disorder following the withdrawal of foreign 
forces, Singapore now is hailed as a city of the future. This 
miraculous history is dramatically recounted by the man 
who not only lived through it all bur who fearlessly forged 
ahead and brought about most of these changes. 
Delving deep into his own meticulous notes, as well as 
previously unpublished government papers and official 
records, Lee derails the extraordinary efforts it took for an 
island city-state in Southeast Asia to survive at chat time. 
Lee explains how he and his cabinet colleagues finished 
off the communise threat to che fledgling state's security 
and began the arduous process of nation building: forging 
basic infrastructural roads through a land chat still consisted 
primarily of swamps, creating an army from a hitherto 
racially and ideologically divided population, scamping out 
the lase vestiges of colonial-era corruption, providing mass 
public housing, and establishing a national airline and air­
port. 
In chis illuminating account, Lee writes frankly about 
his trenchant approach to political opponent s and his 
often unorthodox views on human rights, democracy, and 
inherited intelligence, aiming always "co be correct, not 
politically correct." Nothing in Singapore escaped his 
(continue d on back flap) 1000 
(continue d from front flap} 
watchful eye: whether choosing shrubs for the greening of­
the country, restoring the romance of the historic Raffles 
Hotel, or openly, unabashedly persuading young men to 
marry women as well educated as themselves. Today's 
safe, tidy Singapore bears Lee's unmistakable stamp, for 
which he is unapologetic: "If this is a nanny state, I am 
proud to have fostered one." 
Though Lee's domestic canvas in Singapore was small, 
his vigor and talent assured him a larger place in world 
affairs. With inimitable style, he brings history to life with 
cogent analyses of some of the greatest strategic issues of 
recent times and reveals how, over the years, he navigated 
the shifting tides of relations among America, China, and 
Taiwan, acting as confidant, sounding board, and messen­
ger for them. He also includes candid, sometimes acerbic 
pen portraits of his political peers, including the indomitable 
Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan, the poetry-spouting 
Jiang Zemin, and ideologues George Bush and Deng 
Xiaoping. 
Lee also lifts the veil on his family life and writes tenderly 
of his wife and stalwart partner, Kwa Geok Choo, and of their 
pride in their three children-particularly the eldest son, 
Hsien Loong, who is now Singapore's deputy prime minister. 
For more than three decades, Lee Kuan Yew has been 
praised and vilified in equal measure, and he has estab­
lished himself as a force impossible to ignore in Asian and 
international politics. From Third World to First offers 
readers a compelling glimpse into this visionary's heart, 
soul, and mind. 
LEE KUAN YEW was born in Singapore on September 16, 
1923, a third-generation descendant of immigrants from 
China's Guangdong Province. He read law at Cambridge 
University, England. In 1954 he formed the People's 
Action Party, which won the first Singapore general 
election five years lacer. Lee became the country's first 
prime minister in 1959, at the age of thirty-five. In 
November 1990 he resigned the office to assume the 
pose of senior minister in the Singapore cabinet. 
jacket design by Marc Cohen 
Author photo graph by Alexander Mares-M anton/www.asia-i mages.com 
jacket photo graphs of Singa pore from The Image Bank 
HarperCollinsPublishers www.harpercollins.com 

